                                   pm logo
                     ___________________________________

                     tamiḻ paḻamoḻikaḷ tokuppum
                          āṅkila moḻipeyarppum
                 āciriyar percivāl, pākam 1 (mutal 3000)
                    Tamil Proverbs Collection (over 6000)
             with Their EnglishTranslation - part 1 (first 3000)
                             by Rev. P. Percival
                    In tamil script, unicode/utf-8 format
                     ___________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   Acknowledgements:
   Our Sincere thanks go to the Tamil Virtual Academy for providing a PDF
   of this work.
   The e-text has been generated using Google OCR online tool.
   Sincere thanks also go to Ms. Priya Kulandaivelu for her help in
   proof-reading of this work.
   Preparation of HTML and PDF versions: Dr. K. Kalyanasundaram, Lausanne,
   Switzerland.
   This file was put online on 12 July 2019.
   This file presents the source proverbs in Tamil in Unicode/utf-8 format
   © Project Madurai, 1998-2021.
   Project Madurai is an open, voluntary, worldwide initiative devoted to
   preparation
   of electronic texts of tamil literary works and to distribute them free
   on the Internet.
   Details of Project Madurai are available at the website
   [1]http://www.projectmadurai.org/
   You are welcome to freely distribute this file, provided this header
   page is kept intact.
     __________________________________________________________________

                     tamiḻ paḻamoḻikaḷ tokuppum
               āṅkila moḻipeyarppum, āciriyar percivāl
                    Tamil Proverbs with Their Translation
                             by Rev. P. Percival

   Source:
   Tamil Proverbs with their English Translation
   containing upwards of Six thousand proverbs
   By The Rev. P. Percival,
   Chaplain, Madras Military Female Orphan Asylum:
   Author of the "Land of the Veda" etc.
   Second Edition, 1874
   Madras: Printed and Published at the Dinavartamani Press,
   Little Bourne, Mylapore
   --------------
   PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.
   It is hoped that the following collection of Tamil Proverbs may be
   useful to those who are in any way connected with the interesting
   people who speak that language. Examples of concise and forcible
   expression are thereby furnished, which may tend to aid in the study of
   the language, and occasional allusions to national, social, and
   religious usages may suggest heads of valuable enquiry, while the modes
   of thinking, and the natural shrewdness of the Hindu mind may, be seen
   through this medium. It is presumed that the translation generally
   conveys the sense of the original, although not always with its force,
   nor with theelegance that might be desired. Should it be called for, a
   future edition may remedy some of the existing faults,and also supply
   deficiencies, both as to the character of the translation, and the
   number of the examples.
   P. PERCIVAL.
   JAFFNA, Christmas, 1842.
   ---------------
   PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION.
   A Few words on the history of the book now offered to the Public in an
   enlarged form may not be out of place in the Preface to the Second
   Edition.
   Almost immediately after my arrival in this country in 1826, I entered
   on my Missionary work among the Tamil people, having acquired the
   rudiments of their language in England from a gentleman who had spent
   several years in the South of India and North Ceylon. Intercourse with
   the natives afforded me ample opportunities of becoming acquainted with
   their modes of thought and expression, and, noticing their predilection
   for proverbial sayings, I was led to an early study and use of Tamil
   proverbs.
   In 1830 I was removed to Bengal. There I became acquainted with a
   clergyman who had, like myself, turned his attention to the proverbs of
   the people among whom he dwelt. He collected a considerable number of
   Bengali proverbs, and published them, with an English translation, in a
   small volume, printed at the Press connected with Bishop's College,
   Calcutta. When the Mission in Bengal with which I was connected was
   withdrawn, I returned to my former sphere of labor among the Tamil
   people. As opportunity offered, I collected and arranged proverbs that
   I found current among them; and in 1842 printed a collection of nearly
   nineteen hundred with an English translation.
   PREFACE.
   The First Edition having become scarce, I was urged, by many whose
   judgment I felt bound to respect, to prepare matter for a second and
   enlarged edition. Various causes prevented me from immediately
   undertaking the work. For several years all my time was devoted to the
   revision of the Tamil Scriptures, in conjunction with Messrs. RHENIUS,
   KNIGHT, SPAULDING, HUTCHINGS, and others, and in passing the “Tentative
   Bible” through the Press. Subsequently a visit to England caused a
   further postponement of my plan, but, on my return to Madras in 1854,
   my attention was again directed to the subject of Tamil proverbs.
   In the following year a Committee of gentlemen belonging to the Civil
   and Military Services of Government, Messrs. STOKES, SIM, CHAMIER, and
   Colonels BROWN, PEARS, and BELL resolved to start a Journal, for the
   purpose of diffusing, among the Tamil people, information social,
   political, and literary. The Committee invited my co-operation as
   Editor. This labor I at once accepted, the more readily because for
   several months I had been making arrangements to carry out the same
   idea, and had visited Calcutta to procure information on the subject,
   chiefly from Mr. MARSHMAN. In October 1855 the first number of the new
   journal, the Dinavartamáni, was published. Soon after this I also
   undertook the editing of a Telugu journal of the same scope, and
   bearing the same name. The circulation of these papers throughout the
   Madras Presidency afforded me a good opportunity of inviting the
   subscribers to assist me in the collection of Tamil and Telugu
   proverbs. My request was met by contributions from all parts of the
   country. The former were added to a rapidly increasing collection,
   while a selection from the latter was published, from week to week,
   along with an
   English translation, in the Telugu Dinavartamâni. When the late Major
   CARR informed me that he was preparing a volume of Telugu proverbs for
   the Press, I made over to him my collection, a service he thus
   acknowledged in the Preface to his work “The Translator hns to thank
   the Rev. P. PERCIVAL, Professor of Vernacular Literature, Presidency
   College, for kindly placing at his disposal a MS. containing a large
   number of Telugu proverbs.”
   In the year 1860 my collection of Tamil proverbs contained nearly five
   thousand examples translated into English and ready for the Press. At
   that time, however, I was so much engaged in preparing books and maps,
   in the Vernaculars, for the Director of Public Instruction, that I
   found it impossible to carry out my design of printing these proverbs,
   although I had announced it in the Dinavartamâni. Then followed an
   interval of ten years during which I was engaged in duties absorbing
   all my time and attention. I had the superintendence of the Public
   Instruction Press on my hands; and, aided by the Pundits of the
   Presidency College, and other competent native scholars, had
   theresponsibility of editing, among the works that issued from the
   Press during this period, seven dictionaries, some of which have since
   been re-printed.
   At the beginning of 1870, having been relieved from my heavy duties in
   connexion with the Presidency College and the University, I resolved to
   print the proverbs as they stood, and soon. after this having met the
   Rev. G. FRYAR of Manargudi, Tanjore District, I learnt that he had for
   eight or nine years been also engaged in collecting Tamil proverbs, and
   that his collection then amounted to five thousand examples, and that
   he proposed eventually to publish it on the basis of my First Edition.
   On
   hearing of my own plan, Mr. FRYAR abandoned this purpose, and very
   generously placed his valuable MS. at my disposal, from which I
   obtained several hundred new proverbs.
   Shortly after this, again, one of my compositors brought me an
   old-looking MS. containing over fifteen hundred examples. A volume
   printed in 1861 at Vepery, and containing nearly four thousand
   examples, was also put into my hands. But these collections yielded
   very few proverbs not already contained in my own MS. A Pundit of the
   Government Normal School furnished me with about a hundred fresh
   examples, and a small MS. belonging to a Native Christian lady of
   Tanjore contained a few curious proverbs that I had not seen before.
   These related to Christian character, and evidently originated in
   anything but a benign feeling.
   Altogether my collections in 1872 exceeded fifteen thousand, but they
   only yielded the number contained in this volume. That the outcome of
   so large a gathering should be comparatively small may easily be
   accounted for by the fact that the several collections, in very many
   instances, contained the same proverbs. It must be borne in mind that
   my own collection, which eventually absorbed the others, was made
   during a period extending over forty years, and that, through the
   medium of the Dinavartamâni, I had received contributions from all
   parts of the Madras Presidency, as well from North Ceylon. Hence it was
   but natural that I should anticipate collectors who come into the field
   later.
   But for the omission of many of the admired Aphorisms of the ancient
   Tamil matron, Avveyar, this collection would have been somewhat larger,
   Though these Aphorisms are compositions of
   unequalled brevity and beauty, I have, for the most part, omitted them,
   because they are generally taught in schools, and indeed regarded as
   part of a school course. En passant I may mention that seven or eight
   years ago I printed and published them, in a separate form, with an
   analysis and translation in English, and that a Second Edition of this
   work is now in the Press. Bible proverbs, and those obviously Sanskrit,
   are also omitted, because this collection is designed to be Dravidian.
   Translations from Western proverbs I have for the same reason left out.
   In this edition, as in the First, the proverbs are arranged in
   alphabetical order. This of course is the easiest method. Some years
   ago I thought of classifying the subjects somewhat after the plan of
   Amarakosha, a Sanskrit Dictionary, wherein objects are divided into
   separate classes, as Supernals, Infernals, Men, Animals, &c. A division
   of subjects on the principle of a commonplace book was also thought of,
   and a friend whose judgment I greatly respect, suggested an index.
   Although each of the methods referred to has much to recommend it, at
   length I gave them all up, and resolved to adopt the easiest-the
   alphabetical arrangement. Had I decided otherwise, the work must have
   been delayed ; andas in my case “ the day is far spent,” I might not
   have been able to accomplish my purpose.
   On the analogy of the proverbial expressions current in all countries,
   many scraps of sentences, mere allusions, similitudes, and the like,
   are included in this collection, though not proverbs in the proper
   sense of the term. The objects of Nature, habits, and dispositions of
   animals, government, agriculture and commerce, domestic and religious
   usages supply a large number of proverbial expressions. The incidents
   of classical literature contribute many that prove highly acceptable to
   those who have
   'any acquaintance with the sources of Hindu history. So largely do the
   stories of ancient writers contribute that the fact hasoriginated a
   proverb universal among the people of Bengal.
   What is there after Bhárata? A glance at a few pages of this volume
   will suffice to show that the people among whom such proverbs are
   current cannot be ignorant of the laws of God.
   Vox Populi, vox Dei, may be applied to this aspect of many of the
   Dravidian proverbs :
   “ The people's voice, the voice of God we call ; And what are Proverbs,
   but the people's voice ? Coined first and common made, by common choice
   ;
   Then sure they must have weight, and truth withal." I may be permitted
   to say a few words on the utility of a volume like that now offered to
   the public. A foreigner destined to spend the best part of his life
   among the Tamil people will find their proverbs of inestimable value.
   In these pithy and instructive sayings a vast fund of information will
   be found, not to be obtained from ordinary books, and not at all from
   books designed for Western minds ; —practical maxims, resulting from
   the experience of many generations, maxims that will be sought in vain
   in books of modern origin.
   The translation will, I hope, be generally approved. In some instances
   I have found it difficult to ascertain the meaning ; and in many the
   application has equally puzzled both myself and others to whom I have
   applied for information. In some cases I may have been misled by those
   who might be more disposed to hazard a conjecture than to acknowledge
   ignorance. For the benefit of foreigners the occasional notes might
   have been
   advantageously increased in number, but usages differ so much that
   great caution is required in this matter. So varied is the operation of
   race, language, religion, and climate, upon the character and social
   usages of the Hindus who occupy the vast area of India that it is
   unsafe to assume generally that what is common in one Province is so in
   others,
   In conclusion, any one interested in this work will oblige by sending
   me proverbs not found in the collection, or any suggestions for
   improving the next Edition. Though I may not hope to see another
   edition, my son-in-law, Mr. W. A. SYMONDS, who has long studied Tamil
   proverbs with great interest, will, should it be called for, undertake
   the editing.
   LITTLE BOURNE, MADRAS,
           P. PERCIVAL, February 13, 1874.
                     ___________________________________

             TAMIL PROVERBS, WITH THEIR TRANSLATION IN ENGLISH.
        tamiḻ paḻamoḻikaḷ tokuppum āṅkila moḻipeyarppum
                        Part 1 (first 3000 proverbs)

   1. akaṅkaiyiṟ pōṭṭup puṟaṅkaiyai nakkalāmā?
   Having placed the thing on the palm, why lick the back of the hand?
   2. akaṭavikaṭamāyp pēcukiṟāṉ.
   He speaks artfully.
   3. akatikku ākāyam tuṇai.
   Heaven is the help of the helpless.
   4. akatikkut teyvamē tuṇai.
   God Himself is the help of the helpless.
   5. akati col ampalam ēṟātu.
   The word of the destitute does not reach the assembly.
   An assembly of learned men or men in power. The words of the poor,
   whether they relate to oppression, or to other injuries, or to opinion,
   are not likely to find admission where alone they can avail.
   6. akati talaiyiṟ poḻutu viṭikiṟatu.
   Light breaks on the head of the destitute.
   Blame, or suspicion, will fall on the head of the unprotected and
   friendless. The poor are at work by break of day.
   7. akati peṟuvatu peṇpiḷḷai, atuvum veḷḷi pūrāṭam.
   The destitute brings forth a female child, and that on Friday, under
   the star Purádam.
   Used of one suffering from an accumulation of evils. The condition of
   the parent, the sex of the child, the day of its birth and its ruling
   star are alike inauspicious.
   8. akatiyaip pakuti kēṭkiṟatā?
   What! is tribute demanded of the destitute ?
   9. akattil aḻaku mukattil teriyum.
   The beauty of the mind appears in the face.
   10. akatti āyiram kāy kāyttālum puṟatti puṟattiyē.
   Though the Agatti-Coronilla grandiflora.—brings forth by thousands, its
   fruit remains ungathered.
   Spoken of the beneficent acts of one not held in estimation, and whose
   kindness is not therefore appreciated. The proverb is also used of a
   miser whose treasures are useless.
   11. akappaṭṭukkoḷvēṉ eṉṟō kaḷḷaṉ kaḷaveṭukkiṟatu ?
   Does the thief steal in expectation of being caught ?
   12. akappaṭṭavaṉukku aṣṭamattuc caṉi, ōṭippōṉavaṉukku oṉpatām iṭattu
   rājā.
   He who was caught was under the influence of Saturn in the eighth sign,
   and he who escaped, did so, under the influence of Saturn in the ninth.
   Saturn situated in the eighth sign from that of one's birth is supposed
   to exercise a most malignant influence. This opinion of the Hindus
   appears in many of their Proverbs.
   Hindu Astronomy is made the foundation of a vast system of Astrology.
   The real movements and the relative positions of the planets are
   wrought into a systematic connection with a great variety of arbitrary
   divisions of the signs of the Zodiac, and of the twenty-seven Lunar
   Mansions. To these bodies are added various Mythological appendages, as
   beasts, birds, trees, &c., all of which, of course, being a part of the
   fine-spun theory, help to form in the view of the people generally, a
   more recondite and imposing system than that of Astronomy itself.
   The Astrological dogmas of India have an important bearing on all
   thedomestic arrangements and practices of the people. They extend to a
   great variety of popular superstitions which run out into every
   department of life. This is seen in the lucky and unlucky months, days
   and other divisions of time, in the horoscope, which has a powerful
   controlling influence in marriage, and in other matters relating to the
   settlement of families and in the more general prognostics for the year
   as given in the Hindu Calendar. Astrology in its popular developments
   exerts a powerful influence on all classes of Hindu Society.
   13. akappai piṭittavaṉ taṉṉavaṉāṉāl, aṭippantiyil iruntā leṉṉa,
   kaṭaippantiyil iruntāleṉṉa?
   If he who has the ladle be one's own servant, what matters it whether
   one be seated first or last at the feast?
   The Agappai—ladle—here referred to is made of a piece of cocoanut shell
   with a suitable wooden handle. The shell being very hard and not porous
   is well suited for the purposes of a spoon or ladle. It is easily
   cleaned, and well adapted for earthen cooking Vessels. It may be seen
   in every cooking room or shed throughout
   the Tamil country.
   14. akam ēṟac cukam ēṟum.
   As grain becomes cheaper, enjoyment increases.
   15. akam malintāl añcum maliyum, akam kuṟaintāl añcum kuṟaiyum.
   If grain abound, the five also will abound; if grain be scarce, the
   five will be so.
   16. akam malintāl ellām maliyum, akam kuṟaintāl ellām
   kuṟaiyum.
   If grain abounds, all things abound, if grain be scarce, all things are
   scarce.
   17. akala iruntāl nīḷa uṟavu, kiṭṭa iruntāl muṭṭap pakai.
   If apart, long friendship, if together, the least touch will provoke
   hatred.
   18. akala iruntālp pakaiyum uṟavām.
   When apart, even enmity becomes friendship.
   19. akala iruntālp pukala uṟavu.
   Separation secures manifest friendship.
   20. akalvaṭṭam pakal maḻai.
   A large halo — a rainy day.
   21. akavilai aṟiyātavaṉ tukkam aṟiyāṉ.
   He who knows not the price of grain, knows not sorrow.
   22. akaḻilē viḻunta mutalaikku atuvē vaikuṇṭam.
   The moat into which the alligator has plunged is to itself Vaikundam.
   (Paradise.)
   23. akā nākkāyp pēcukiṟāṉ.
   He speaks glibly.
   24. akirttiyam ceykiṟavaṉ mukattil viḻikkiṟatā?
   Is it to see the face of one who acts improperly?
   25. akōra tapaci viparīta cōraṉ.
   A terrible ascetic, an atrocious cheat.
   26. akōra tapaci, viparīta nipuṇaṉ.
   In austerity, severe ; in perversity, an adept. Prone to extremes.
   27. akkarai māṭṭukku ikkarai paccai.
   Green pasture on this shore for the cattle on that.
   28. akkāṭu veṭṭip parutti vitaikkiṟēṉ eṉṟāl, appā eṉakkoru tuppaṭṭi
   eṉkiṟāṉ piḷḷai.
   If I say that I am about to clear away the jungle to sow cotton seed,
   my child exclaims, O father, give me a cloth. Sanguine and very
   anticipatory.
   29. akkāṭu veṭṭip parutti vitaittāl, appā muḻacciṟṟāṭai eṉkiṟatām peṇ.
   If I clear away the jungle and sow cotton seed, it is said that the
   girl exclaimed, O father, a cubit of cloth.
   30. akkāḷ irukkiṟavaraiyil maccāṉ uṟavu.
   The friendship of a brother-in-law lasts while one's sister lives.
   31. akkāḷ uṇṭāṉāl, maccāṉ uṇṭu.
   If one has a sister, he may have a brother-in-law.
   32. akkāḷ uṭaimai arici, taṅkaicci uṭaimai taviṭā?
   Is the property of the elder sister rice, and that of the younger bran?
   Said of one who is extremely chary about his own property, and
   indifferent about that of another.
   33. akkāḷ uṟavum maccāṉ pakaiyumā ?
   Whilst cherishing friendship for the sister, are you at enmity with the
   brother-in-law ?
   34. akkāḷaik koṇṭāl, taṅkaiyai muṟai kēṭpāṉēṉ?
   Having taken in marriage the elder sister, why inquire after the rank
   of the younger ?
   35. akkāḷaip paḻittut taṅkai apacāriyāṉāḷ.
   Having reproached her elder sister, the younger played the harlot.
   36. akkāḷ tāṉ kūṭappiṟantāḷ , maccāṉum kūṭap piṟantāṉā?
   My sister was indeed born of the same mother : was my brother in-law
   also ?
   37. akkirārattil piṟantālum, nāy vētam aṟiyumā?
   Will a dog understand the Vedas, although born in a Brahman village ?
   38. akkirārattukku oru āṭu vantāl, āḷukku oru mayir.
   Should a sheep come into a Brahman village, each person will get but a
   hair.
   After a sheep has been sacrificed in a Brahmanical village and the
   carcass consumed, the Brahmans may use the hair when performing poja :
   this interpretation is disputed.
   39. akkirārattu nāy piratiṣṭaikku virumpiṉatupōla.
   As a dog longed for the consecrated things of a Brahman village.
   Said when great expectations are entertained of something that is
   likely to prove illusory : an amusing story is told about this proverb.
   40. akkiṉi malaimēl karppūrapāṇam pirayōkittatu pōla.
   As one discharged a camphor arrow at a burning mountain.
   Spoken of an act done to injure another, fruitless or inadequate, and
   possibly destructive of the means employed.
   41. akkiṉi tēvaṉukku apiṣēkam ceytatu pōl irukkiṟāṉ.
   He is as if a libation had been poured out to the god of fire.
   Used of one naturally very black, who on hearing the proverb if
   heunderstands its purport, is of course very angry. When water is
   poured on burning charcoal the cinders appear exceedingly black. The
   intended reflection is not the less insulting because of the
   complimentary way in which it is conveyed.
   42. akkiṉiyāṟ cuṭṭa puṇ viṣamikkātu.
   A cauterized wound will not fester much.
   43. akkuttokku illātavaṉukkut tukkam eṉṉa?
   Whence sorrow to him who has no connections ?
   Said of one who is so obscure and isolated as to have no one whose
   griefs he can share or assuage.
   44. aṅkattai āṟṟil alaicoṇātā?
   Is it improper to bathe in a river ?
   45. aṅkattaik koṇṭupōy āṟṟil alaiciṉālum, tōṣam illai.
   Although he take his body and wash it in the river, no fault will be
   found.
   46. aṅkattaik koṉṟu āṟṟil cērkkavoṇṇātu.
   A body that has been deprived of life (murdered) may not be put into a
   river.
   47. aṅkāṅku vaipōkamāyirukkiṟāṉ, iṅkē pārttāl araikkācu mutalum illai.
   He is seen everywhere enjoying himself: when looked at in his
   homestead, he is not worth half a cash.
   Said of one who, when out, affects to be well off, whereas he has
   nothing at all to depend upon. The word (kācu) Cash, is used for
   several kinds of coin, also for
   money.
   48. aṅkāṭi vilaiyai atira aṭikkātē.
   Do not beat down the market price.
   Do not contravene the established opinions and practices of the people
   with whom you are associated.
   49. aṅkāṭikkāriyaic caṅkītam pāṭac coṉṉāl, veṅkāyam karu vēppilai
   eṉpāḷ.
   If a song be demanded of a woman going along with her market basket,
   she will exclaim venkaiyam, karuveppilai, (Onions, curry leaves.)
   50. aṅkiṭutoṭuppikku aṅkiraṇṭu kuṭṭu, iṅkiraṇṭu coṭṭu.
   One who frequently changes his party will receive two slaps here and
   three cuffs there.
   51. aṅkum tappi iṅkum tappi akappaṭṭukkoṇṭāṉ tummaṭṭippaṭṭaṉ.
   Tummattippattan, who had escaped here and there, was caught.
   Referring to the adventures of a sorcerer.
   52. aṅkum iruppāṉ iṅkum iruppāṉ, ākkiṉa cōṟṟukkup paṅkum iruppāṉ.
   He is here and there and has a share also in the boiled rice.
   53. aṅkēṇṭi makaḷē kañcikku aḻukiṟāy? iṅkē vantāl, kāṟṟāyp paṟakkalām.
   Why, my daughter, are you crying there for kanji ? come hither and you
   may fly as the wind.
   Spoken of a proffered change which may be for the worse.
   54. acal vāḻntāl, aintu nāḷ paṭṭiṉi kiṭappāḷ.
   If her neighbour prospers, she will starve herself for five days.
   55. acal vīṭu vāḻntāl paratēcam pōkiṟatā?
   Is one to go to a foreign country, because his neighbour prospers ?
   56. acalum picalum aṟiyāmal aṭuttavaṉaik keṭukkap pārkkiṟāṉ.
   Regardless of circumstances, he aims to destroy his neighbour.
   57. acavāp payirum kaṇṭatē uṟavum.
   Stunted grain—friendship at sight.
   Both valueless.
   58.acaintu tiṉkiṟatu māṭu, acaiyāmal tiṉkiṟatu vīṭu.
   A cow eats moving; a house eats standing.
   59. accam illātavaṉ ampalam ēṟuvāṉ.
   The fearless goes into the assembly.
   Used of those who have more courage than discretion.
   60. accāṇi illāta tēr muccāṇum ōṭātu.
   A car without a linch-pin will not move even three spans.
   Intimating that appliances however trivial cannot be dispensed with,
   and that the best instruments and weapons require due management.
   61. accikkup pōṉālum, akappai araikkācu.
   Though taken to Achchi, a wooden ladle will fetch only half a cash.
   Achchi being a prosperous place, cooking utensils are there is great
   demand, yet even there this inferior article will bring no more than
   its value. Spoken of the intrinsic value of a thing.
   62, acciyilum piccaikkārar uṇṭu.
   There are beggars even in Achchi.
   See the preceding proverb.
   63. añcaṉakkāraṉ mutukil vañcaṉaikkāraṉ ēṟiṉāṉ.
   The cheat has got on the shoulders of the conjurer.
   Said when one deceiver has got the better of another.
   64. añcalivantaṉam ārukkum naṉmai.
   Deferential respect is agreeable to every one.
   65. añcā neñcu paṭaittāl ārukku āvāṉ?
   Who will tolerate a presumptuous or impudent man?
   66. añcāvatu peṇ keñciṉālum kiṭaiyātu.
   A fifth born female cannot be obtained though earnestly sought.
   A fifth born female is regarded as the special favourite of fortune; an
   eighth — as the very opposite.
   67. añcilē vaḷaiyātatu aimpatilē vaḷaiyumā?
   Will that which was not bent at five, bend at fifty ?
   68. añciṉavaṉaik kuñcum veruṭṭum.
   Even a fledgeling may scare the timid.
   69. añcil aṟiyātavaṉ aimpatil aṟivāṉā?
   Will one ignorant at five understand at fifty ?
   Early instruction essential to future knowledge. The proverb may also
   suggest that growth in years will not make one, that is naturally dull,
   bright.
   70. añciṉavaṉaip pēy aṭikkum.
   Demons strike the timid.
   71. añci āṇmai cey.
   Act manfully, but modestly.
   72. añciṉāraik keñcuvikkum, aṭittārai vāḻvikkum.
   Those who were once feared may be made to beg; and they who were once
   oppressed may be made prosperous.
   73. añciṉavaṉ kaṇṇukku ākāyamellām pēy.
   To the timid the sky is full of demons.
   74. añcu kācukkuk kutiraiyum vēṇṭum, atuvum āṟṟaik kaṭakkap pāyavum
   vēṇṭum.
   A horse is required for five cash, and he must be able to leap over a
   river.
   Used in derision when great results are expected from inadequate means.
   75. añcu kuñcum kaṟiyāmō? aṟiyāp peṇṇum peṇṭāmō?
   Are five young birds a curry? Is a young girl a wife?
   76. añcukku iraṇṭu paḻutillai.
   Of the five senses two are uninjured.
   Used with reference to some, of several desiderated objects that have
   been accomplished, or of some things that remain uninjured.
   77. añcu paṇam koṭuttālum, ittaṉai āttiram ākātu.
   Even if you were to give away five fanams, such haste or precipitation
   will not do.
   Precipitance in judgment is worse than actual loss.
   78. añcum mūṉṟum uṇṭāṉāl, aṟiyāp peṇṇum kaṟi camaikkum..
   If possessed of five and three, even a young girl may make a curry.
   The five are acid, pepper, salt, mustard and cumin; the three are
   water, fuel and fire.
   This proverb is used by a man when his wife has prepared a curry that
   does not please him.
   79. añcuruttāli neñcuruvak kaṭṭikkoṇṭu vantāṟpōl valakkāramāyp
   pēcukiṟāy.
   Thou speakest ostentatiously as a matron who has come having her bosom
   adorned with a tali ornamented with five figures.
   The tali is a marriage symbol used as a wedding ring is in Europe.
   Various astrological observances attend the melting of the gold &c. The
   five forms referred to are the five weapons of Vishnu. Viz. the dischs,
   the club, the conch, the bow and the sword. The Romanists ornament the
   tali with the figure of a dove.
   80. añcu vayatu āṇpiḷḷaikku aimpatu vayatup peṇ kāl muṭakkavēṇṭum.
   A woman of fifty must bend the knee before a boy of five.
   Referring to the deference paid to the male sex by the Hindus.
   81. añcuvōraik keñcaṭikkap pārkkiṟāṉ.
   He aims to humble the timid by force.
   82. añcūrccaṇṭai cuṇṭāṅki, aiṅkala arici oru kavaḷam.
   Conflict in five villages is but curry, five maracals of rice is only a
   mouthful.
   Spoken of one who delights in the misfortunes of others.
   83. añceḻuttum pāvaṉaiyum avaṉaippōl irukkiṟatu.
   The five letters and the sentiment are like him.
   Spoken of a child who in feature and disposition resembles its father.
   84. aṭakkattup peṇṇukku aḻakēṉ?
   Of what use is beauty to a damsel living in retirement?
   85. aṭakkamuṭaiyār aṟiñar, aṭaṅkātār kallār.
   The well-ordered are wise; the disorderly are fools.
   86. aṭakkamē peṇṇukku aḻaku.
   Modesty is the ornament of a woman.
   The proverb may be used of moderation generally and self-restraint.
   87. aṭakkuvāraṟṟa kaḻukkāṇiyum koṭṭuvāraṟṟa mēḷamumāyt
   tirikiṟāṉ.
   Adwarf without restraint—an unused tomtom-- he wanders about.
   Used of one irrecoverably worthless.
   88. aṭaṅkāta pāmpiṟku rājā mūṅkilttaṭi.
   A bamboo staff is the king of a vicious snake.
   89. aṭaṅkāta peṇcātiyiṉālē attaikkum namakkum pollāppu.
   A disobedient wife is an evil both to her mother and to one's self.
   Spoken of a person inimical alike to two parties.
   90. aṭaṅkāta maṉaiviyum āṅkāra puruṣaṉum.
   A disobedient wife and a self-willed husband.
   Said of uncongenial society.
   91. aṭaṅkiṉa piṭi piṭikkavēṇṭum, aṭaṅkāta piṭi piṭikkalākātu.
   Seize that which can be grasped, not that which cannot.
   Aim at the practicable.
   92. aṭampaṅkoṭiyum tiraṇṭāl miṭukku.
   Even tender creepers when united are strong.
   93. aṭā eṉpāṉ, veḷiyē puṟappaṭāṉ.
   He will speak abusively, but will not come out.
   94. aṭātu ceytavar paṭātu paṭuvār.
   They who do what they ought not, will suffer what they might have
   avoided.
   It serves him right.
   95. aṭi atiracam kuttuk koḻukkaṭṭai
   A slap is a cake, a cuff is sweetmeat.
   Spoken of one who is beyond ordinary discipline.
   96. aṭi utavukiṟatu pōla aṇṇaṉ tampi utavuvārkaḷā?
   Will an elder or younger brother aid one as effectually as discipline
   or punishment ?
   97. aṭikka aṭikkap pantu vicai koḷḷum.
   The more a ball is struck, the more it rebounds.
   98. aṭikkiṟa kāṟṟukkum peykiṟa maḻaikkum payappaṭa vēṇṭum.
   Beware of a beating wind and of falling rain.
   Beware of things beyond human control.
   99. aṭikkiṟa kāṟṟu veyilukkup payappaṭumā?
   Does the beating wind fear the sunshine ?
   Spoken of irrelevant means to subdue an evil.
   100. aṭikkum kāṟṟilē eṭuttut tūṟṟavēṇṭum.
   Winnow while the wind blows.
   101. aṭikkum oru kai, aṇaikkum oru kai.
   One hand smites, the other embraces.
   Discipline regulated by love; used sometimes of Divine chastisements.
   102. aṭiccaṭṭikkuḷḷē karaṇam pōṭalāmā?
   Can one make a somersault in the bottom of a chatti?
   103. aṭitta ērukkum kuṭitta kūḻukkum cari.
   What he received for his labour (ploughing) only paid for the kanji he
   drank.
   104. aṭittup paḻuttatum paḻamā?
   Is that which ripens by force fruit?
   (A favour done under constraint is no favour.)
   105. aṭittup pāl pukaṭṭukiṟatā?
   Is a child to be beaten in order to pour milk into its mouth?
   106. aṭittu vaḷarkkāta piḷḷaiyum muṟukki vaḷarkkāta mīcaiyum
   cevvaiyākā .
   Neither the child that is unchastised, nor the mustache that is
   untwirled will be right.
   Implying that due care must be exercised to secure a desiderated
   result.
   107. aṭittuviṭṭavaṉ piṉṉē pōṉālum, piṭittu viṭṭavaṉ piṉṉē pōkalākātu.
   Though you may trust one who has administered correction, you may not
   trust one who has betrayed you.
   108. aṭi nākkilē nañcum nuṉi nākkilē amirtamumā ?
   What! is it nectar at the tip of the tongue while poison is at the
   root?
   Said of one, or to one whose professions are at variance with his
   intentions.
   109. aṭi nocci nuṉi āmaṇakkā?
   Is the stem nochchi, and the top a castor plant?
   Intimating that the same characteristics will prevail in a family or
   tribe.
   110. aṭippāṉēṉ piṭippāṉēṉ? aṭakkukiṟa vaḻiyil aṭakkuvōm.
   Why beat him, why seize him? we will subdue him by proper means.
   111. aṭimēl aṭi aṭittāl, ammiyum nakarum.
   Even a grindstone will move under repeated strokes.
   112. aṭimai paṭaittāl āḷvatu kaṭaṉ.
   It is the duty of one who has a slave to employ him.
   113. aṭiyaṟṟa paṉai pōl viḻuntāṉ.
   He fell as a palmira tree severed from its root.
   So perfect was his prostration. This may be used of obeisance or ruin.
   114. aṭiyaṟṟa maram pōlē.
   As a tree without root.
   115. aṭiyaṟṟāl nuṉi viḻāmalirukkumā?
   If the root fail, will not the top fall?
   116. aṭiyā nāṭu paṭiyātu.
   A province in which authority is not enforced will not submit.
   117. aṭiyāta māṭu paṭiyātu.
   An unchastised bullock will not obey.
   118. aṭiyiluḷḷatu naṭuvukkum muṭivukkum uṇṭu.
   That which exists in the bottom is likewise in the middle and top.
   119. aṭiyum paṭṭup puḷitta māṅkāyā tiṉṉavēṇṭum?
   And besides being beaten, must (one) also eat sour mangoes?
   Spoken of something imposed on one who is already suffering from
   questionable inflictions.
   120. aṭiyeṉṟu aḻaikkap peṇṭīr illai , āṇ ettaṉai peṇ
   ettaṉai eṉkiṟatu pōla.
   Like saying to a man how many boys have you, and how many girls, when
   he has not a wife to whom he can say, Adi.
   121. aṭivāṉam kaṟuttāl, āṇṭai vīṭu vaṟukkum.
   If the horizon becomes black, the household of the farmer will begin to
   parch.
   122. aṭukkaḷaik kiṇaṟṟilē amutam eḻuntāṟpōla.
   Like the springing up of nectar ip a kitchen well.
   123. aṭukkaḷaikku oru peṇṇum ampalattukku oru āṇum
   irukkiṟateṉkiṟāṉ.
   He says, to cook, there is a woman; for outdoor work, a man.
   Spoken of needful help already at hand.
   124. aṭukkukiṟa arumai teriyumā uṭaikkiṟa nāykku?
   Does the dog that breaks (the cooking pots) know how difficult it is to
   arrange them?
   Used when a heedless clumsy person has disarranged or spoiled some
   cherished work on which great pains had been bestowed.
   125. aṭutta kūrai vēvuṅkāl taṉ kūraikku mōcam.
   When a neighbour's roof is in flames one's own is in danger.
   126. aṭuttavaṉaik keṭukkalāmā?
   Is it right to destroy one's neighbour?
   127. aṭuttavaṉ vāḻap pakalē kuṭi eṭuppāṉ.
   Because his neighbour prospers he removes in the day-time i. e., at
   once.
   128. aṭuttāraik keṭuttu aṉṉam iṭṭāraik kaṉṉam iṭukiṟāṉ.
   He destroys those about him and robs those who fed him.
   129. aṭuttu aṭuttuc coṉṉāl toṭutta kāriyam muṭiyum.
   By continually urging, the work undertaken may be completed.
   130. aṭuttuk keṭuppāṉ kapaṭaṉ, toṭuttuk koṭuppāḷ vēci.
   A deceiver destroys when near, a harlot in contact.
   131. aṭuttu vantavarkku ātaravu colluvōṉ kuru.
   He is a teacher or spiritual guide who gives wholesome counsel to those
   who resort to him.
   132. aṭupparukil veṇṇeyai vaitta katai.
   A story about butter being placed near the hearth.
   133. aṭuppuk kaṭṭikku aḻaku vēṇṭumā?
   Is ornamentation requisite in a hearth or fireplace? The needful is
   sufficient in common things.
   134. aṭuppu neruppum pōy vāyttaviṭum pōccutu.
   No fire in the hearth, no bran in the mouth.
   135. aṭuppu erintāl pori poriyum.
   Should the fire burn, you may parch grain.
   136. aṭaintōrai ātari.
   Take care of those who are under your protection.
   137. aṭaippaip piṭuṅkiṉāl pāmpu kaṭikkum.
   A snake will bite him who removes a fence.
   138. aṭaimaḻaikkuḷḷē ōr āṭṭukkuṭṭi cettatupōla.
   As a lamb died in heavy rain.
   Said of one coming to grief from want of due care.
   139. aṭaimaḻai viṭṭum ceṭimaḻai viṭavillai.
   Though the heavy rain is over, the dropping from the trees continues.
   Though the greater evils have passed away, the lesser remain. Though
   the spoiler is not upon us, the ordinary imposts are demanded by men in
   power
   140. aṭṭamattuc caṉi kiṭṭa vantatupōla .
   As Saturn in the eighth sign approached.
   Some person or thing ominous of evil.
   141. aṭṭamattuc caṉi naṭṭam varac ceyyum.
   Saturn in the eighth sign will bring loss.
   See the preceeding.
   142. aṭṭamattuc caṉi piṭittatu, arait tuṇiyum urintu koṇṭatu.
   Saturn in the eighth sign seized, and stripped off even the waist
   cloth.
   143. aṭṭamattuc caṉiyai vaṭṭikku vāṅkiṉāṟpōla.
   Like borrowing Saturn in the eighth sign on interest.
   144. aṭṭaikkum tiruttiyillai , akkiṉikkum tiruttiyillai.
   The leech is not satisfied, nor is fire. Inordinate desire is never
   satisfied.
   145. aṭṭaiyaip piṭittu mettaiyil vaittatu pōla.
   As a reptile caught and placed on a cushion.
   Said of a person in an unnatural situation.
   146. aṭṭaiyai eṭuttu mettaiyil vaittālum cettaiyaiyē nāṭum.
   Although you take a reptile and place it on a cushion, it will seek a
   heap of dried leaves.
   147. aṇil ēṟaviṭṭa nāy pārppatupōla.
   As a dog looks up at a squirrel that has ascended and escaped his
   grasp.
   A despairing look after a thing irrecoverably lost.
   148. aṇiṟpiḷḷaikku nuṅku aritō? āṇṭicci piḷḷaikkuc
   cōṟu aritō?
   Does the squirrel lack the pulp of the young palmyra fruit, or the
   child of a Saiva mendicant, rice ?
   To give to religious mendicants is held, by the Hindus generally, to be
   meritorious.
   149. aṇu makāmēruvāmā?
   Is an atom the great Meru?
   The sacred mountain Meru, forming the centre of the seven continents
   according to the Mythological geography of the Hindus ; it appears to
   mean the highland of Tartary north of the Himalaya.
   150. aṇuvum malaiyāccu, malaiyum aṇuvāccu.
   An atom is become a mountain, a mountain an atom.
   151. aṇai kaṭanta veḷḷam aḻutālum varumā?
   Though one cry after it, will the flood that has burst its bund return
   ?
   As a premonition, this proverb is used to inculcate caution, andas a
   remark on misfortune, it suggests the uselessness of regret.
   152. aṇai kaṭanta veḷḷattai maṟippavar ār?
   Who can stop a flood that has burst its bund?
   Spoken of insuperable evils.
   153. aṇṭattiṟku uḷḷatu piṇṭattiṟkum uṇṭu.
   Whatever exists in the universe exists in the human body.
   154. aṇṭattil illātatum piṇṭattil uṇṭā?
   Does that exist in the body which does not exist in the universe ?
   The greater includes the lesser. This and the preceeding proverb really
   relate to the dialectics of the learned and philosophic schools.
   155. aṇṭattaic cumakkiṟavaṉukkuc cuṇṭaikkāy pāramā?
   Will a fruit be burdensome to Him who bears the universe ?
   Used when some favour is sought of one who is known to possess ample
   resources.
   156. aṇṭamum piṇṭamum antaraṅkamum veḷiyaraṅkamum.
   Of the universe and the body, the former is hidden, the latter open.
   157. aṇṭāta piṭāri ārukku aṭaṅkuvāḷ?
   Whom will the unapproachable demoness obey?
   The term Pidari is generally applied to a village goddess who is
   regarded as an evil being.
   158. aṇṭai vīṭṭuc caṇṭai kaṇṇukkuk kuḷircci.
   A quarrel in a neighbouring house is refreshing.
   Spoken of envious persons who may be supposed to delight in a
   neighbour's shortcomings or misfortunes
   159. aṇṭai vīṭṭup pārppāṉ caṇṭai mūṭṭit tīrppāṉ.
   The neighbouring Brahman will breed a quarrel and settle it.
   Said of one who promotes evil in order that he may gain by it.
   160. aṇṭaiyiṟ camarttaṉ illāta rājāvukku apakīrtti varum.
   Disgrace will attach to a king who has not a competent person near him.
   161. aṇṇaṉār araṇmaṉaiyil aḷḷi uṇṇap pōkiṟāḷ.
   She is going to eat rice in her elder brother's house.
   162. aṇṇaṉiṭattil āṟu mātam vāḻntālum, aṇṇiyiṭattil arai nāḻikai
   vāḻalāmā?
   Although one may live six months with an elder brother, one cannot
   abide with his wife even half an hour.
   The first condition is proverbially difficult, how much more so the
   second?
   163. aṇṇaṉukkup peṇ piṟantāl, attai acal nāṭṭāḷ.
   If my elder brother has a daughter, my paternal aunt becomes an alien.
   164. aṇṇa ṉum tampiyum ceṉmap pakaivar.
   An elder and younger brother are natural (birth) enemies.
   They are supposed to be subject to envy, jealousy and hatred on account
   of the rights they inherit.
   165. aṇṇaṉaik koṉṟa paḻi, cantaiyilē tīrttukkoḷḷukiṟatu pōla.
   Like taking revenge in the market-place, or in the place where the
   Vedas are read, on account of an elder brother who has been murdered.
   166. aṇṇaṉ periyavaṉ, appā neruppu ūtu.
   My elder brother is superior, father, blow the fire.
   Said when an inferior is treated with grouter deference than one really
   entitled to distinction.
   167. aṇṇaṉ kompu pampaḻa paḷāccu.
   The horn of my elder brother is as soft (harmless) as a shivered stick.
   The foxes of a certain region familiar with the hare had, for a long
   time, an idea that its fine long ears were formidable horns, and there
   fore kept aloof from it. At length an old fox proposed that they should
   try to ascertain the nature of the extraordinary excrescences on its
   head; and suggested that some of their neighbours should be invited to
   a feast. This was done ; and when all things were ready the foxes led
   their guests into the festive hall and they were seated a fox and a
   hare alternately, at table. During the feast one of the foxes
   professing great admiration for the fine horns of their guests, laid
   his hand upon one and looking round uttered the Proverb. On
   hearing this, each for seized and devoured the hare next to him.
   168. aṇṇaṉ uṇṇātatu ellām maittuṉikku lāpam.
   Whatever is left uneaten by my elder brother is an advantage to my
   sister-in-law.
   169. aṇṇaṉ tampi vēṇṭum iṉṉam tampirāṉē.
   Elder brother and younger brother are still wanted, O God.
   170. aṇṇāviyār viḻuntāl aṭaivumuṟai.
   Should a teacher make a slip, it is attributed to his art.
   171. aṇṇāvi piḷḷaikkup paṇam pañcamā , ampaṭṭaṉ piḷḷaikku mayirpañcamā?
   Is the child of an artist (a dancing-master) without money, is the
   son of a barber in want of hair ?
   172. aṇṇākkum toṇṭaiyum atira aṭaittatu.
   It obstructed the throat and the uvula so as to cause them to quake.
   173. aṇṇāmalaiyār aruḷuṇṭāṉāl maṉṉārcāmi mayiraip piṭuṅkumā?
   If the favour of Annamalai (Siva) be obtained, will the god Mannnar
   pull out a hair?
   Safe as regards an inferior, if protected by a superior.
   174. aṇṇāmalaiyārukku aṟupattu nālu pūcai, āṇṭikaḷukku eḻupattu nālu
   pūcai .
   The forms of worship prescribed for Siva are sixty-four; whereas the
   seasons for feeding religious mendicants are seventy-four.
   175. atika ācai atika naṣṭam.
   Excessive desire entails excessive loss.
   176. atika ācai aṣṭa tarittiram.
   Excessive desire or greed ends in eight forms of poverty,
   The eight forms of poverty are the absence or negation of the eight
   sources of fruition or enjoyment. These are peṇ women ; āṭai apparel ;
   aṇikalaṉ jewels ; pōcaṉam food ; tāmpūlam betel ; parimaḷam perfumes ;
   pāṭṭu Songs ; pūvamaḷi reclining on flowers.
   177. atikāriyum talaiyāriyum oṉṟāṉāl, viṭiyumaṭṭum tiruṭalām.
   If the chief and headman are united, stealing may be carried on till
   day - break.
   178. atikāri vīṭṭil tiruṭit talaiyāri vīṭṭil vaittatu pōla.
   As one placed in the house of the headman what he had stolen in the
   house of the chief.
   Said of a thing done unwittingly.
   179. atikāri vīṭṭuk kōḻi muṭṭai kuṭiyāṉavaṉ vīṭṭu ammiyai uṭaikkum.
   An egg obtained from the house of the chief will break the grindstone
   in the house of the peasant.
   Implying that authority imparts to the insignificant overwhelming
   power.
   180. atiṣṭam toṭṭa kaḻukkāṇi.
   A short thick person favoured by fortune.
   181. atiṣṭam āṟāyp perukukiṟatu.
   Fortune flows as a river.
   182. atiṣṭam iruntāl aracu paṇṇalām.
   When fortune smiles one may reign as a king.
   183. atiṣṭam illātavaṉukkuk kalappāl vantālum, ataiyum pūṉai kuṭikkum.
   Although the unfortunate gets a large measure of milk, the cat will lap
   it all up.
   Destiny prevails to thwart benefits when one is unfortunate.
   184. atiṣṭavāṉ maṇṇait toṭṭālum poṉṉākum.
   When touched by the fortunate even earth becomes gold.
   185. atira aṭittāl, utira viḷaiyum.
   If thoroughly ploughed, the yield will be abundant.
   186. atilum itu putumai , itilum atu putumai.
   This is stranger than that, and that is stranger than this.
   187. atilē kuṟaiccal illai āṭṭaṭā pūcāri.
   O, priest there is no lack, proceed with the ceremony.
   Said to a Pujachari by way of encouragement.
   188. atu ataṟku oru kavalai, aiyāvukku eṭṭuk kavalai.
   Each object is attended by a single anxiety, whereas the master has
   eight.
   189. atu ellām uṇṭiṭṭu vā eṉpāṉ.
   He will eat it all and say come.
   190. atukku iṭṭa kācu miṉakkeṭṭu arivāḷmaṇaikkuc cuṟukkiṭṭatā?
   Did the money, diverted from the object for which it was given, avail
   for the purchase of a sickle ?
   191. atuvum pōtāteṉṟu aḻalāmā iṉi?
   May you hereafter weep because that also is too little ?
   192. atairiyamuḷḷavaṉai añcāta vīraṉ eṉṟāṟpōla.
   Like calling a coward a fearless hero'
   Said of false adulation.
   193. atai viṭṭālum katiyillai, appuṟam pōṉālum vaḻiyillai.
   If that is renounced there is no help, if you go further there is no
   way.
   Spoken of evils from which there is no escape.
   194. attam mikutiyiṉāl allavō ampaṭṭaṉ peṇ kēṭkiṟāṉ?
   It is by reason of his great wealth, is it not, that the barber asks a
   maiden in marriage ?
   195. attaṉaiyum nērntāḷ, uppiṭa maṟantāḷ.
   Although she put in so many ingredients, she omitted salt.
   Said of something complete in all but one essential.
   196. attāṉ cettāṉ mayirāccu, kampaḷi mettai namakkāccu.
   My brother-in-law's death has not affected me any more than the loss of
   a hair; but his blanket and mattress have become mine.
   197. attikkāyaip piṭṭuppārttāl, aṅkum iṅkum poḷḷal.
   If you break open a fig, you will see cavities here and there.
   198. atti pūttatupōl irukkiṟatu avaṉ vantatu.
   His coming is like the flowering of the fig tree.
   Something that never happens.
   199. attip paḻattaip piṭṭuppārttāl, attaṉaiyum puḻuttāṉ.
   The more a fig is opened, the greater will be the number of worms
   found.
   200. attippūvai ār aṟivārkaḷ?
   Who ever saw the flower of a fig-tree?
   201. attippūvaik kaṇṭavarkaḷ uṇṭā? āntaik kuñcaip pārttavarkaḷ uṇṭā ?
   Are there any who have seen the blossom of the fig-tree ? are there any
   who have seen the young of an owl?
   Said of things that rarely or never happen.
   202. attimarattil tottiya kaṉipōla.
   Like fruit sticking to a fig-tree.
   203. attu mīṟippōṉāṉ, pittukkoḷḷi āṉāṉ.
   He transgressed and became mad.
   204. attaikku mīcai muḷaittāṟ ciṟṟappā eṉkalām.
   Should the mustache of one's aunt grow we may call her uncle.
   Referring to improbable contingencies.
   205. antam cintiṉavaṉukku aḻaku oḻukumā ?
   Will beauty emanate from one void of symmetry ?
   206. antaṇarkkut tuṇai vētam.
   The Veda is the staff of the Brahman.
   207. antaṇar maṉaiyiṟ cantaṉam maṇakkum.
   The house of the Brahman is perfumed.
   It being a requisite for ceremonial usages.
   208. antarattil kōl eṟinta antakaṉ pōla.
   Like a blind man who has thrown his staff into the air.
   209. anti īcal pūttāl, aṭaimaḻai atikarikkum.
   If white-ants take wing in the evening, it prognosticates excessive
   rain.
   210. anti maḻai aḻutālum viṭātu.
   The evening rain will not cease even if one should weep.
   211. antūtu nellāṉēṉ.
   I am become as useless as a grain of paddy eaten by insects.
   212. appacci kutampaiyaic cūppap piḷḷai muṟṟiṉa tēṅkāykku aḻukiṟatu
   pōla.
   While the father is sucking the husk of the cocoanut his son is crying
   for the kernel or pulp.
   Indicating desires beyond one's means.
   213. appacci kōvaṇattaip paruntu koṇṭōṭukiṟatu, piḷḷai vīravāḷip
   paṭṭukku aḻukiṟatu.
   While the hawk snatches away the father's waist-cloth his daughter is
   crying for a silk dress.
   Said in reproof when wishes are entertained beyond one's means.
   214. appattai eppaṭic cuṭṭīrkaḷ? tittippai eppaṭi nuḻaittīrkaḷ?
   How did you bake the cake ? how did you sweeten it ?
   215. appam cuṭṭatu caṭṭiyil, aval iṭittatu tiṭṭaiyil,
   Cakes are baked in a chatty, steeped rice is flattened in a mortar.
   Means must be suited to the end.
   216. appam eṉṟāṟ piṭṭukkāṭṭa vēṇṭumā?
   If bread, is it necessary to break and prove it ?
   217. appaṉ arumai appaṉ māṇṭāl teriyum, uppiṉ arumai uppuc camaintāl
   teriyum.
   The value of a father is known after his decease, that of salt when
   exhausted.
   218. appaṉ cōṟṟukku aḻukiṟāṉ, piḷḷai kumpakōṇattil kōtāṉam ceykiṟāṉ.
   The father is crying for rice and his son is performing the ceremony of
   giving a cow at Kumbhakónam.
   219. appaṉ periyavaṉ, ciṟṟappā curuṭṭukku neruppuk koṇṭuvā eṉkiṟatu
   pōla.
   Like saying, my father is a great person, uncle, bring fire to light my
   cigar.
   Pride of wealth leads one to neglect the observance of established
   social rules.
   220. appā eṉṟāl ucci kuḷirumā ?
   If one exclaim, alas ! alas! will the crown of the head become cool ?
   Expressions of sympathy are unavailing if not associated with real
   help.
   221. appiyācam kūcāvittai .
   Experience is knowledge that maketh not ashamed.
   222. appiyāca vittaikku aḻivu illai.
   Thoroughly acquired knowledge does not fail.
   Said in commendation of obvious efficiency.
   223. amañci uṇṭō kuppunāykkarē eṉpāṉēṉ?
   Why ask of the military officer if there is any compulsory service ?
   Why gratuitously seek avoidable evil?
   224. amarapaṭcam pūrvapaṭcam, kiṣṇapaṭcam cukkila paṭcam.
   The latter and former halves of the moon—its dark and bright sides.
   'These symbolize the light and darkness, the gladness and sadness of
   human life.
   225. amarikkai āyiram peṟum.
   Quietness is worth thousands of gold.
   226. amarttaṉukkum kāṇi vēṇṭām, camarttaṉukkum kāṇi vēṇṭām.
   An oppressor and a clever man need no landed property.
   227. amāvācaik karukkalilē peruccāḷi pōṉatellām vaḻi.
   In the darkness of the new moon the bandycoote finds a way wherever he
   goes.
   228. amāvācaip parukkai eṉṟaikkum akappaṭumā?
   Is the food peculiar to the new moon to be had every day ?
   229. amutam uṇkiṟa vāyāl viṣam uṇpārkaḷā?
   Will poison be received by the mouth accustomed to nectar ?
   230. ampaṭṭakkirutum vaṇṇāra oyilum.
   The arrogance of a barber and the affectation of a washerman.
   Said when inferiors give themselves airs of importance.
   231. ampaṭṭaṉ kuppaiyaik kiḷaṟiṉāl mayir mayirāyp puṟappaṭum.
   If the rubbish heap of the barber be stirred, nothing but hair turns
   up.
   The more you examine an inferior thing, the viler will it appear.
   232. ampaṭṭaṉ piḷḷaikku mayir arukkāṇiyā?
   Is hair a rare sight to the child of a barber ?
   233. ampalak kaḻutai ampalattiṟ kiṭantāl eṉṉa, aṭutta tirumāḷikaiyiṟ
   kiṭantāl eṉṉa ?
   What matters it whether the helpless ass lies in an open place or in
   the adjoining palace.
   234. ampalattil ēṟum pēccai amacaṭakkam paṇṇap pārkkiṟāṉ.
   He is aiming to conceal the rumour which is to be brought before the
   public assembly (for discussion.)
   235. ampalattil kaṭṭuccōṟu aviḻkkiṟāppōl.
   As boiled rice tied up for a journey is untied in an open place.
   236. ampalattil poti aviḻkkal ākātu.
   It is not good to unpack in an open place.
   Unnecessary exposure of one's personal affairs is to be avoided.
   237. ampāṇi taittatu pōlap pēcukiṟāṉ.
   He speaks like piercing arrows.
   238. ampikoṇṭu āṟu kaṭappōr, nampikkoṇṭu narivāl koḷḷuvārkaḷā?
   Will those who cross the river on a raft entrust themselves to the tail
   of a jackal ?
   239, ammaṇamum iṉṉalum āyucupariyantamā?
   Are nakedness and misery to continue to the end of life ?
   240. ammā keṭṭa kēṭṭukku mukkāṭu oṉṟā?
   Is a veil necessary for a woman in a bad condition ?
   241. ammāṉum marumakaṉum oru vīṭṭukku āḷ aṭimai.
   The father-in-law and son-in-law are slaves in the same house.
   242. ammāṉ makaḷukku muṟaiyā?
   Why enquire after the relationship of the daughter of one's maternal
   uncle ?
   243. ammāṉ vīṭṭu veḷḷāṭṭiyai aṭikka atikāriyaik kēṭka vēṇṭumā?
   Having to chastise a maid-servant in a father-in-law's house, is it
   necessary to ask the chief permission to do so ?
   244, ammi miṭukkō araippavaḷ miṭukkō?
   Whether is stronger, the grindstone or she who grinds ?
   245. ammi mitittu aruntati pārttatu pōla.
   Like one standing on a grindstone and looking at Arundathi.
   Arundathi is a star in the Great Bear regarded as the wife de Vasishta,
   a pattern of chastity. This star is pointed out to the bride at the
   marriage ceremony.
   246. ammiyiruntu aracaṉai aḷippāḷ.
   She will bring forth a king on the grindstone.
   During the time of child-birth it is not uncommon for the mothers to be
   seated on a grindstone.
   247. ammiyum kuḻaviyum ākāyattil paṟakkaccē, ecciṟ kallai eṉakku eṉṉa
   putti eṉṟāṟ pōla.
   As a leaf-plate sought advice when the grindstone and its rollerwere
   flying in the air.
   218. ammukkaḷḷi āṭaiyait tiṉṟāl veṇṇey uṇṭā?
   If a thievish woman eat the cream will there be any butter ?
   249. ammaikku amarkkaḷam poṅkip paṭaiyuṅkaḷ.
   The strife of Ammai, (a village goddess) has begun, boil and present
   (rice.)
   250. ammaiyār eppoḻutu cāvāḷ? kampaḷi eppoḻutu namakku miccamākum?
   When will my mistress die ? when shall I get her blanket ?
   251. ammaiyār nūṟkiṟa nūlukkum, pēraṉ kaṭṭukiṟa araiñāṭkayiṟṟukkum
   cari.
   The yarn spun by the old dame will only just suffice to form
   waist-string for her grandson.
   252. ammaiyār peṟukiṟatu araikkācu , talai ciraikkiṟatu mukkāl kācu.
   Three fourths of a cash is demanded for shaving the head of an old
   woman worth only half a cash.
   253. ammaiyārkku eṉṉa tukkam, kantait tukkam.
   What sorrow has the old dame ? that of raggedness.
   254, ammaiyārē vārum, kiḻavaṉaik kaikkoḷḷum.
   Come, old lady, and receive the old man.
   255. ayalār uṭamaikkup pēyāyp paṟakkiṟāṉ.
   He flies at his neighbours' property as a demon,
   256. ayalār uṭaimaiyil antakaṉ pōl iru.
   Be blind as regards your neighbours' property.
   257. ayaṉ iṭṭa kaṇakku ārukkum tappātu.
   No one escapes the decree of Brahma.
   258.ayaṉ iṭṭa eḻuttil aṇuvaḷavum tappātu.
   The writing of Brahma will not fail in the least.
   259. ayiraiyum caṟṟē arukkumām piṭṭukkuḷ pōṭṭup picaṟāmal.
   Even the Airai (small as it is) will give itself airs if it be not
   mixed with the food.
   260. ayōkkiyar aḻaku aparañcic cimiḻil nañcu.
   Beauty in the unworthy is poison in a casket of fine gold.
   261. ayyaṉ aḷantapaṭi.
   As God measured.
   262. ayyāvaiyar kūḻukku appaiyaṅkār tātāvā?
   Is Appaiyangar the dispenser of Aiyavaiyar's gruel ?
   263. hara hara eṉpatu peritō, āṇṭikku iṭuvatu peritō?
   Whether is greater as regards merit, to say Hara, Hara, or to give to
   the mendicant?
   264. arakkaṉ āṇṭāl eṉṉa, maṉitaṉ āṇṭāl eṉṉa?
   What matters it whether a demon or a man rules?
   265. araṅkiṉṟi vaṭṭāṭalum, nūlaṟiviṉṟip pēcalum oṉṟu.
   To play draughts without a board and to speak without a knowledge of
   the shastras are alike.
   266. aracaṉ aḷaviṟku ēṟiṟṟu.
   It reached even the king.
   267. aracaṉ illāta nāṭu , puruṣaṉ illāta vīṭu.
   A country without a king, a family without a head.
   268. aracaṉ uṭaimaikku ākāyam cākṣi.
   The sky is the witness regarding the king's property.
   269. aracaṉ aṉṟu kollum, teyvam niṉṟu kollum.
   The king kills at once, God delays and kills.
   270. aracaṉ kalliṉ mēl kattari kāykkiṟatu eṉṟāl, kottu āyiram kulai
   āyiram eṉpārkaḷ.
   If it be reported that brinjals are growing on a stone in the king's
   courtyard they will say that the outcome is thousands of bunches and
   thousands of clusters.
   271. aracaṉ eppaṭiyō appaṭiyē kuṭikaḷ.
   As is the king such are his subjects.
   272. aracaṉ evvaḻi kuṭikaḷum avvaḻi.
   The people follow the lead of their rulers
   273. aracaṉ vaḻippaṭṭatu avaṉi.
   It is the earth i.e., its inhabitants that follows the king.
   274. aracaṉ vaḻippaṭātavaṉ illai.
   No one is exempt from duty to the king.
   275. aracaṉukku oru col aṭimaikkut talaiccumai.
   As regards the king it is a word, to the subject it is a burden.
   276. aracaṉukku valiyār añcuvatu eḷiyārkku aṉukūlamāyirukkiṟatu.
   The fear of the king among those in power operates auspeciously as
   regards the poor.
   277. aracaṉukkut tuṇai vayavāḷ.
   The help of a king is his mighty sword.
   278. aracaṉum aravum cari.
   A king and a snake are alike.
   279. aracaṉum aḻalum cari.
   A king and fire are alike.
   280. aracaṉum neruppum pāmpum cari.
   A king, fire. and snake are alike.
   281. aracaṉai nampip puruṣaṉaik kaiviṭṭatu pōla.
   Like losing a husband through trusting in a king.
   282. aracukku illaic ciṟumaiyum perumaiyum.
   A king observes not the distinction between little and great.
   283. aracuṭaiyāṉai ākāyam kākkum.
   The heavens guard the king.
   284. araṇṭavaṉ kaṇṇukku iruṇṭatu ellām pēy.
   To the eye of the timid every thing obscure is a demon.
   285. arattai aram aṟukkum, vayirattai vayiram aṟukkum.
   A file will cut a file, diamonds cut diamonds.
   286. arapik kutiraiyilum aiyampēṭṭait taṭṭuvāṇi nallatu.
   An Aiyampettah pony is preferable to an Arab steed.
   287. aravattaik kaṇṭāl kīri viṭumā?
   If a mungoose see a snake will it let it escape?
   288. aravukku illaic ciṟumaiyum perumaiyum.
   The distinction of big and little does not apply to snakes.
   289. araṉ aruḷillāmal aṇuvum acaiyātu.
   Not an atom will move without the permission of God.
   290, araṉ aruḷ aṟṟāl, aṉaivarum aṟṟār.
   Should the favour of God fail, every one will come to nought.
   291. ari ari eṉṟāl, rāmā rāmā eṉkiṟāṉ.
   If I say Ari, Ari, he cries Rama, Rama.
   292. ari eṉkiṟa akṣaram terintāl atikāram paṇṇalām.
   If one understand the import of the word Ari, he may exercise regal
   power.
   293. ari eṉkiṟa akṣaram terintāl atikkiramam paṇṇalāmā?
   May one transgress the bounds of propriety if he comprehends the
   purport of the syllable Ari?
   294. ari eṉṟāl āṇṭikkuk kōpam, ara eṉṟāl tātaṉukkuk
   kōpam.
   If one says Ari the Saiva mendicant is angry, if one says Ara the
   Vaishnava mendicant is angry.
   295. arici aḷḷiṉa kākkāypōla.
   Like a crow that has taken np rice.
   296. arici āḻākkāṉālum, aṭuppukkaṭṭi mūṉṟu vēṇṭum.
   Though there be only one álak of rice, three supporting points in the
   hearth are required.
   Alak - a small measure of capacity.
   297. arici uṇṭāṉāl varicaiyum uṇṭu, akkāḷ uṇṭāṉāl
   maccāṉum uṇṭu.
   If there be rice there will be order—honour also, if a sister exist a
   brother-in-law may.
   298. arici uḻakkāṉālum aṭuppu mūṉṟu.
   Though there be only one ulak of rice, three supporting points in the
   hearth are required.
   An ulak is two alaks or the fourth of a measure.
   299. arici eṉṟu aḷḷip pārppārum illai, umi eṉṟu ūtippārppārum illai.
   No one takes up rice to examine it, nor does any one blow upon chaff.
   300. arici koṇṭu uṇṇa akkāḷ vīṭṭukkup pōvāṉēṉ?
   Seeing you have to pay for the rice you eat why go to the house of your
   elder sister?
   301. aricikkut takka ulaiyum āmuṭaiyāṉukkut takka vīṟāppum.
   Water in a pot proportioned to the rice, and a display of authority in
   a husband suited to his condition.
   302. aricip pakaiyum āmuṭaiyāṉ pakaiyum uṇṭā ?
   Does hatred against rice or a husband exist?
   303. aricip potiyuṭaṉ tiruvārūr.
   Tiruvaroor with a bag of rice.
   Spoken of a double benefit--the grain is valuable, and a visit to a
   sacred place is auspicious.
   304. arici maṟanta ulaikku uppu eṉṉa?
   Of what use is salt in a pot of boiling water without rice ?
   305. ariccantiraṉ vīṭṭukku aṭutta vīṭu.
   His house is next to Harischandra's.
   Used ironically of a notorious liar. Harischandra, a king famed for
   veracity.
   306. aritu aritu añceḻuttu uṇartal.
   It is difficult indeed to comprehend the purport of the five letter,
   The famous fire lettered incantation called the mūlamantiram asbeing
   the foundation of all spiritual wisdom and all religion, and the means
   prescribed and proper forobtaining emancipation from births and all the
   evils thereunto belonging, and union with the supreme.
   307. arittu erikkiṟa cuppikku āyam tīrvai uṇṭā ?
   Is tax levied op dry twigs scraped together for fuel ?
   308. ariya carīram antaratteṟinta kal.
   The precious body is a stone thrown into the air.
   309. ariyatu ceytu eḷiyatukku ēmāntu tirikiṟāṉ.
   Having performed difficult things he wanders about alarmed at that
   which is easy.
   310. ariyum civaṉum oṉṟu, alla eṉkiṟavaṉ vāyil maṇ.
   Vishnu and Siva are one; let sand be put into the mouth of him who
   denies it.
   311. arivāḷum acaiyavēṇṭum, āṇṭai kuṭiyum keṭavēṇṭum.
   The sickle must be moved, and the landlord's family must be ruined.
   312. arivāḷ cūṭṭaippōlak kāyccal māṟṟavō?
   Is it attempted to remove the heat of a burning fever as if it were
   that of a sickle ?
   313. arivāḷ cuṟukkē arivāḷmuṉai karukkē.
   Was it the dexterity of the reaper, or the sharpness of the sickle.
   Success in an enterprise is mainly owing to the means employed.
   314. arivai moḻi kēṭṭāl apattaṉ āvāṉ.
   He who listens to the words of a woman will be accounted worthless.
   315. arukākap paḻuttālum, viḷāmarattil vauvāl cērātu.
   Although the fruit of the wood-apple tree (Feronia elephantum) close by
   ripens, bats will not approach it.
   316. arukkāṇi nācciyār kuraṅkuppiḷḷaip peṟṟāvām.
   The haughty dame is said to have brought forth a monkey child.
   317. arukkāṇi muttuk karikkōlamāṉāḷ.
   She who was a precious pearl has become black as coal.
   318. arukkāmaṇiyā murukkam pūvā?
   Is it a rare gem or a Murukkam flower?
   319. aruṅkōṭait turumpu aṟṟuppōkutu.
   Through severe drought every blade has perished.
   320. aruṭcelvam ārukkum uṇṭu, poruṭcelvam ārukkum illai .
   Divine favour is common to all, material wealth is not.
   321. aruṇāmparamē karuṇāmparam.
   A cloth tinged red indicates the divine favour.
   Refers to the dress of religious mendicants.
   322. arumai aṟiyātavaṉ āṇṭu eṉṉa, māṇṭu eṉṉa?
   What matters it whether he who has no discrimination rules or dies ?
   323. arumai marumakaṉ talaipōṉālum pōkaṭṭum, ātikālattu ural pōkal
   ākātu.
   If it must be so, let the head of my son-in-law go; but the old
   mortar must not go.
   Said of things which long possession has made peculiarly precious.
   324. arumaiyaṟṟa vīṭṭil erumaiyum kuṭiyirātu.
   Even a buffalo will not abide in a house where it is not regarded.
   325. arum cuṉai nīr uṇṭāl, appoḻutē rōkam.
   The drinking of water from a hill reservoir will at once produce
   disease.
   326. aruḷ vēṇum, poruḷ vēṇum, aṭakkam vēṇum.
   Kindness, wealth and self-restraint are essentials.
   327. araikkācukku aḻinta kaṟpu āyiram poṉ koṭuttālum kiṭaiyātu.
   Chastity forfeited for half a cash, cannot be recovered though one
   should give thousands of gold.
   323. araikkācukkup pōṉa māṉam āyiram koṭuttālum vārātu.
   The honour that has been forfeited for half a cash, will not return
   though one give thousands.
   329. araikkiṉum cantaṉam ataṉ maṇam aṟātu.
   Though sandal wood bé rubbed, its fragrance will not be destroyed.
   330. araikkuṭam tatumpum niṟaikuṭam tatumpātu.
   The water in a pot half full wabbles, if full it wabbles not.
   331. araiccalliyai vaittu erukku ilaiyaik kaṭantatu pōla.
   As one leaped over an Erukku leaf, Calotropis gigantea, under which he
   hadconcealed half a challi.
   A cballi is a small copper coin, a fractional part of a larger coin.
   332. araiccīlai kaṭṭak kaikku upacāramā?
   Is the hand to be complimented for tying the waist-cloth?
   333. araiccoṟ koṇṭu ampalam ēṟalāmō?
   Can one go before an assembly with half a word?
   334. araiccoṟ koṇṭu ampalam ēṟiṉāl, araiccol muḻuc collākum.
   Half a word admitted into the assembly becomes a whole word.
   335. araitta payaṟu muḷaittāṟpōla.
   As if macerated gram should sprout.
   336. araittu mīntatu ammi ciraittu mīntatu kuṭumi.
   After grinding the stone remains; after shaving the head, the kudumi
   (tuft of hair) remains.
   A tuft of hair left on the head of a boy or man with a knot at the
   end. It is considered becoming ; and is usually about a foot in length.
   337. araippaṇam koṭuttu aḻac colli orupaṇam koṭuttu ōyaccolluvāṉēṉ?
   Having given half a fanam to weep, why give a fanam to cease ?
   Fanam - a small coin of gold or silver.
   338. araippaṇac cēvakam āṉālum araṇmaṉaic cēvakam pōl ākumā?
   Though the service bring half a fanam, will it be equal to service in
   the king's house?
   339. araippaṇam koṭukkap pālmāṟi, aimpatu poṉ koṭuttuc cērvai ceyta
   katai.
   A story of one who gave fifty gold pieces for a compound medicine after
   having hesitated to give half a fanam.
   340. araiyiṟ puṇṇum aṇṭai vīṭṭuk kaṭaṉum ākātu.
   Sores about the waist, and debt to one's neighbour are both bad.
   341. araivittai koṇṭu ampalam ēṟiṉāl araivittai muḻu vittai ākumā?
   If one goes before an assembly with half learning will it become
   perfect?
   342. aluttup piluttu akkāḷ vīṭṭukkup pōṉāl akkāḷ iḻuttumaccāṉiṭattiṟ
   pōṭṭāḷām.
   When he went to his elder sister's wearied and exhausted, it is said
   that she sent him to his brother-in-law.
   343 alai eppoḻutu oḻiyum, talai eppoḻutu muḻukukiṟatu ?
   When will the waves be still, when will he wash his head ?
   344. alai mōtum pōtē talai muḻukukiṟatu.
   Bathing in the midst of beating waves.
   Said of attempting to do a thing under adverse circumstances.
   345. alaivāyt turumpupōla.
   Like a straw on a wave.
   346. allakkāṭṭu nari pallaik kāṭṭukiṟatu pōla.
   Showing his teeth like a jackal of the ginger fields.
   Said of one who shows signs of disappointment,
   347. allavai tēya aṟam perukum.
   As vice wanes, virtue waxes.
   348. allaṟpaṭṭu aḻuta kaṇṇīr celvattait tēykkum paṭai.
   The bitter tears of the oppressed are a file that wears away the wealth
   (of the oppressor.)
   349. allal aṟṟa paṭukkai aḻakilum aḻaku.
   A bed free from anxiety is the most agreeable of all things.
   350. allal aruḷāḷvārkkillai.
   The kind-hearted are free from sorrow.
   351. allal oru kālam celvam orukālam.
   A time for adversity, and a time for prosperity.
   352. allātavaṉ vāyil kaḷḷai vār.
   Pour toddy into the mouth of the wicked.
   Add fuel to the file.
   353. allāta vaḻiyāl poruḷ īṭṭal kāmam tuyttal ivai ākā.
   Ill-gotten wealth and illicit pleasure are both bad.
   354. allum pakalum aḻukkaṟak kal.
   Study day and night to be free from impurity.
   355. avakaṭam uḷḷavaṉ arumai aṟiyāṉ.
   A wily man does not know the value (of friendship)
   356. avakuṇakkāraṉ ākācamāvāṉ.
   The vicious will evaporate into thin air.
   357. avacarakkāraṉukkup putti maṭṭu.
   The hasty are deficient in sense.
   358. avacarakkōlam aḷḷit teḷikkiṟēṉ.
   For hasty ornamentation I take up and sprinkle.
   359. avacarattil upacāramā?
   Is ceremonious behaviour demanded when one is in a hurry ?
   360. avacarattiṟkup pāvam illai.
   A thing done in an emergency is not criminal.
   361. avacaramāṉāl arikkaṉ caṭṭiyilum kai nuḻaiyātu.
   When in haste the hand will not enter even into a large chatty.
   362. avacāripōkavum ācai irukkiṟatu aṭippāṉ eṉṟu payamum irukkiṟatu.
   She is inclined to play the harlot, and is afraid that her husband will
   beat her.
   363. avacārikku vāy peritu, añcu āṟu aricikkuk koti peritu.
   The mouth of the harlot is large, and the bubbling of five or six
   grains of rice when boiling is excessive.
   361. avacārikku āṇai illai, tiruṭikkut teyvam illai.
   The harlot has no oath, the thief has no god.
   Spoken of one wholly derelict.
   365. avacāri āṭiṉālum atiṣṭam vēṇṭum tiruṭap pōṉālum tiṟamai vēṇṭum.
   If one plays the harlot fortune is wanted, and when one goes to steal
   ability is needed.
   366. avacāriyeṉṟu āṉaimēl ēṟalām tiruṭiyeṉṟu teruvil varalāmā?
   As an abandoned woman one may ride on an elephant, but can one go along
   a street as a thief?
   367. avatantiram taṉakku antaram.
   Chicanery ends in one's ruin.
   368. avatikkuṭikkut teyvamē tuṇai.
   God himself is the help of a family in extremities.
   369. avattaṉukkum camarttaṉukkum kāṇi kavai illai.
   The worthless and the cheat have no need of land.
   370. avappoḻutilum tavappoḻutu nallatu.
   Time is better spent in austerities than in vanity.
   371. avamāṉampaṇṇi vekumāṉam pēcukiṟāṉ.
   Having acted reproachfully he speaks flatteringly.
   372. avarā cuṟukkē arivāḷmaṇai karukkē.
   He is surely as sharp as the edge of a sickle.
   Spoken ironically of a man of vain pretensions.
   373. avaruṭaiya ciṟaku muṟintu pōyiṟṟu.
   His wing is broken.
   374. avar avar maṉacē avar avarkkuc cāṭci.
   Each one's mind is the witness that acquits or condemns.
   375. avar avar eṇṇattai āṇṭavar aṟivār.
   The supreme Ruler knows the purposes of every one.
   376. avalaṭcaṇam uḷḷa kutiraikkuc cuḻi cuttam pārkkiṟatillai.
   The circular curls of an ugly horse are not examined.
   377. avalamāy vāḻpavaṉ cavalamāyc cāvāṉ.
   He who leads a useless life will die a miserable death.
   378. avalai niṉaittu uralai iṭittāṟpōla.
   As if one beat an empty mortar thinking it contained unhusked: steeped
   rice.
   Spoken of absence of mind.
   379. avaḷ pāṭukiṟatu kuyil kūvukiṟatu pōl irukkiṟatu.
   Her singing is like the voice of the kuyil (an Indian cuckoo.)
   380. avaḷ camarttup pāṉai cantiyil uṭaintatu.
   Her best cooking-pot was broken in the middle of the road.
   381. avaṉukku ivaṉ eḻuntiruntu uṇpāṉ.
   This person will rise and eat before him.
   382. avaṉukkuk kappaṭāvum illai veṭṭukkattiyum illai.
   He has neither a cloth nor a knife.
   Said of ope utterly destitute.
   383. avaṉukkuḷḷē akappaṭṭirukkiṟatu eṉ piḻaippu.
   That which is in his keeping is my livelihood.
   384. avaṉukkuc cukkiraticai aṭikkiṟatu.
   He is now under the auspicious influence of the planet Venus.
   Spoken of one who is the favourite of fortune.
   385. avaṉukkum ivaṉukkum erumaiccaṅkāttam.
   The intimacy or friendship of these two persons is that of the buffalo.
   386. avaṉuṭaiya pēccu kāṟcollum araiccollum.
   His speech consists of quarters and halves of words.
   Undecisive.
   387. avaṉuṭaiya vāḻvu naṇṭukkuṭuvai uṭaintatu pōl irukkiṟatu.
   His prosperity is scattered like crabs from a broken vessel.
   388. avaṉē ivaṉē eṉpataiviṭac civaṉē civaṉē eṉkiṟatu nallatu.
   It is better to cry Siva, Siva, than opprobriously to reproach others.
   389. avaṉē veṭṭavum viṭavum karttaṉ.
   He has authority both to behead and to release.
   390. avaṉai avaṉ pēcciṭṭup pēccu vāṅki, āmai mallāttukiṟāppōl
   mallāttippōṭṭāṉ.
   Having fished out his secrets by cunning he turned him upside down as a
   turtle is turned.
   391. avaṉōṭu ivaṉai ēṇivaittup pārttālum kāṇātu.
   He cannot equal him though he raise himself to the top of a ladder.
   Said of one who is far inferior to another either socially or
   intellectually.
   392. avaṉ nā acaiya nāṭu acaiyum.
   When his tongue moves the country moves.
   393. avaṉ aruḷ aṟṟāl aṉaivarum aṟṟār , avaṉ aruḷ uṟṟālaṉaivarum uṟṟār.
   Without his favour all are destitute, if he favour, all are prosperous.
   Said of God's grace and displeasure.
   394. avaṉ oru kuḷirnta koḷḷi.
   He is a cold firebrand.
   Said of a person really dangerous though apparently not so.
   395. avaṉ mititta iṭattil pullum cākātu.
   Even the grass under his footsteps will not die.
   Used when speaking of one remarkable for gentle habits.
   396. avaṉ mititta iṭam paṟṟiyerikiṉṟatu.
   The place whereon he treads bursts into flames.
   Spoken of the reckless and violent.
   397. avaṉ metta attumiñciṉa pēccukkāraṉ.
   His words exceed all bounds.
   Said of one who delights in abusing others.
   398. avaṉ kālāl iṭṭa vēlaiyaik kaiyāl ceyvāṉ.
   The work that was indicated by the foot he will perform by the hand.
   399. avaṉ cāti entap putti kulam enta ācāramō atutāṉ varum.
   The devices of his caste and habits of his tribe will predominate.
   400. avaṉ kālāl muṭintataik kaiyāl aviḻkkakkūṭātu.
   That which he tied with his foot cannot be loosened by the hand.
   Spoken of one of superior skill.
   401. avaṉ acaiyātu aṇuvum acaiyātu.
   Unless he move not an atom will move.
   402. avaṉ avaṉ eṇṇattai āṇṭavaṉ ākkiṉālum ākkuvāṉ, aḻittālum aḻippāṉ.
   Every man's purpose will be either effectuated or frustrated by the
   Supreme Ruler.
   403. avaṉ kaḻuttukkuk katti tīṭṭukiṟāṉ.
   He is sharpening a knife for another's throat.
   404. avaṉ uḷḷellām puṇ uṭampellām koppuḷam.
   His mind is full of sores, his body is covered with blister.
   405. avaṉ eṉakku aṭṭamattuc caṉi.
   To me he is Saturn in the eighth sign.
   The most malignant of enemies.
   406. avaṉ totti uṟavāṭit tōlukku maṉṟāṭukiṟāṉ.
   He seeks friendship and prays for a skin.
   407. avaṉ taṉṉālē tāṉ keṭṭāl aṇṇāvi eṉṉa ceyvāṉ?
   What can his teacher do if he ruin himself?
   408. avaṉ kālāl kīṟiṉatai nāṉ nāvāl aḻikkiṟēṉ.
   What he has scored with his feet I efface with my tongue.
   409avaṉ uṉakkuk kiḷḷukkīraiyō?
   Do you consider him as a green-herb nipped off?
   410. avaṉ kaiyaik koṇṭē avaṉ kaṇṇil kuttiṉāṉ.
   He took another's hand and struck his eyes.
   411. avaṉ ciṟakillāp paṟavai.
   He is a bird without wings.
   412. avaṉ eṉ talaikku ulai vaikkiṟāṉ.
   He is preparing to cook my head.
   413. avaṉ avaṉ ceyta viṉai avaṉ avaṉukkē.
   Every one is responsible for his own actions.
   414. avaṉ eṉṉai ūtip paṟakkaṭikkap pārkkiṟāṉ.
   He aims to scatter me to the winds.
   415. avaṉ eriporiyeṉṟu viḻukiṟāṉ.
   He breaks out saying burn him, fry him.
   Said of one who suddenly bursts into a rage.
   416. avaṉ ōṭippāṭi nāṭiyil aṭaṅkiṉāṉ.
   Having run and sung, he at length sank like the pulse.
   417. avaṉ vallāḷakaṇṭaṉai vārippōriṭṭavaṉ.
   He is the man who encountered and fought the champion.
   418. avaṉ koñcappuḷḷiyā?
   Is he a man of limited wealth ?
   Spoken of a slovenly miser.
   419. avāntarattil akkiṉi paṟṟumā?
   Can fire be kindled in mid-air ?
   No, except by the Almighty "who holds the lightning in his hand and
   tells it whom to strike."
   420. avitta payaṟu muḷaitta katai pōla.
   Like the story of the germination of boiled peas.
   421. avivēki uṟavilum, vivēki pakaiyē naṉṟu.
   Better is the hatred of the wise than the friendship of fools.
   422. aviḻ eṉṉa ceyyum añcu kuṇam ceyyum poruḷ eṉṉa ceyyum pūvai vacam
   ceyyum.
   What can rice do? it can work the five senses, what can wealth do ? it
   can subdue the world.
   423. avaiyilum oruvaṉ cavaiyilum oruvaṉ.
   One who belongs to this convention and to that convention.
   424. avvaḷavu iruntāl aṭukkivaittu vāḻēṉō.
   If I had so much should I not arrange my chatties earthen cooking
   vessels and prosper.
   Spoken regretfully of succour which ought to be and is not afforded.
   425. aḻakilē piṟanta pavaḷakkoṭi akattilē piṟanta cāṇikkūṭai.
   In beauty equal to natural coral, at home a cow-dung basket.
   426. aḻakiṟku mūkkai aṟuppār uṇṭā?
   Are there any who cut the nose for the sake of beauty?
   427. aḻaku iruntu aḻum, atiṣṭam iruntu uṇṇum.
   Beauty will sit and weep, fortune will sit and eat.
   428. aḻakup peṇṇē kāṟṟāṭi uṉṉai aḻaikkiṟāṇṭi kūttāṭi.
   O beautiful maid, frail kite, the comedian calls you.
   Spoken of a female whoso demeanour is inconsistent with modesty.
   429. aḻakukku iṭṭāl āpattukku utavum.
   A jewel worn as an ornament may aid in adversity.
   Gold ornaments are often given as security for money borrowed to trade
   with, as well as to serve in pressing emergencies.
   430. aḻaccollukiṟavar tamar, cirikkaccollukiṟavar piṟar.
   They who advise weeping are one's friends, those who advise laughing
   are strangers.
   Spoken with reference to the character of advisers.
   431 aḻaccollukiṟavaṉ piḻaikkac colluvāṉ, cirikkac collukiṟavaṉ
   keṭaccolluvāṉ.
   He who counsels us to weep does so to favour life; he who counsels
   mirth seeks our ruin.
   432. aḻikkappaṭuvāṉaik kaṭavuḷ aṟivīṉaṉ ākkuvār.
   God dements him who is to be destroyed.
   433. aḻintavaḷ ārōṭu pōṉāl eṉṉa?
   What matters it with whom an abandoned woman goes ?
   434. aḻinta nantavaṉattil acuvam mēyntu eṉṉa, kaḻutai mēyntu eṉṉa?
   What matters it whether a horse or an ass grazes in a garden that lies
   waste ?
   435. aḻivaḻakkuc coṉṉavaṉ paḻi poṟukkum maṉṉavaṉ.
   One who seeks to maintain an unjust claim and a king who extenuates
   crime.
   Both are injurious to society.
   436. aḻukaḷḷar toḻukaḷḷar ācārakkaḷḷar.
   Weeping hypocrites, canting sycophants and religious formalists.
   437aḻukiṟa āṇaiyum cirikkiṟa peṇṇaiyum nampakkūṭātu.
   A weeping man and a smiling woman are not to be trusted.
   438. aḻukiṟa vīṭṭil iruntālum irukkalām, oḻukukiṟa vīṭṭil irukkalākātu.
   Though one may abide in a house of mourning, it is not possible to
   remain in one that is leaky.
   439. aḻukiṟa piḷḷaikku vāḻaippaḻam kāṭṭukiṟatu pōla.
   Like showing a ripe plantain to a crying child.
   A premium on naughtiness.
   440. aḻukiṟa vēḷai pārttu akkuḷ pāyccukiṟāṉ.
   He tickles when one is weeping.
   Spoken of something that is obtruded at an inconvenient time.
   441. aḻukiṟataṟku araip paṇam koṭuttu, ōykiṟataṟku oru paṇam koṭu.
   Having given half a fanam for weeping, give a fanam to cease.
   442. aḻukaiyum āṅkāramum cirippuk kelippōṭā?
   Are grief and self-will things to be made sport of ?
   443. aḻukkuc cīlaikkuḷḷē māṇikkam.
   A ruby in a dirty rag.
   444, aḻukkai aḻukkuk kollum iḻukkai iḻukkuk kollum.
   Dirt will remove dirt, reproach will overcome reproach.
   445. aḻukkait tuṭaittu maṭimēl vaittālum puḻukkaik kuṇam pōkātu.
   Though cleaned and placed on ope's knee, the mean disposition of a
   slave or low person will not leave him.
   446 aḻuta kaṇṇum cintiya mūkkum.
   A weeping eye and a running nose.
   447. aḻutavaṉukku akaṅkāramillai.
   He who is weeping has no pride.
   448. aḻutapiḷḷai pālkuṭikkum.
   A crying child obtains milk.
   449. aḻuta piḷḷai uram peṟum.
   The weeping child will gain strength.
   450. aḻutum piḷḷai avaḷē peṟa vēṇṭum.
   Although she may weep, she herself must bare the child.
   451. aḻutta neñcaṉ ārukkum utavāṉ, iḷakiṉa neñcaṉ evarkkum utavuvāṉ.
   The hard-hearted will be of use to none, the tender hearted will be of
   use to all.
   452. aḻuvār aṟṟa piṇamum āṟṟuvār aṟṟa cuṭalaiyum.
   A corpse unwept and a funeral pyre unquenched.
   An affair or person forsaken by all.
   453. aḻuvār aḻuvār tam tam tukkamē tiruvaṉ peṇṭīrukku aḻuvārillai.
   All weep on account of their own griefs, pone un account of Tiruvan's
   wife.
   Spoken of feigned sympathy and also of that outward expression of
   sorrow which is occasioned by surrounding circumstances.
   454. aḻaiyā vīṭṭiṟku nuḻaiyāc campanti.
   The mother of a bride or bridegroom will not visit their new relations
   unless invited.
   455. aḷakāpuriyilum viṟakutalaiyaṉ uṇṭu.
   There are firewood carriers even in Alagapuri, (the city of Kuvera.)
   Kuvera a wealthy king; now regent of the North and the guardian of
   riches.
   456. aḷakāpuri koḷḷaiyāṉālum, atiṣṭa īṉaṉukku oṉṟum illai.
   Although Alagapuri be given up to plunder, the unfortunate gains
   nothing thereby.
   457. aḷakēcaṉ āṉālum aḷavu aṟintu celavu ceyyavēṇṭum.
   Though as wealthy as Kuvera you must keep your expenses within due
   bounds.
   458. aḷakkiṟa nāḻi akavilai aṟiyumā?
   Does the measure know the price of grain ?
   459. aḷanta nāḻikoṇṭu aḷappāṉ.
   He will measure in the accustomed measure.
   460. aḷantāl oru cāṇillai arintāl oru caṭṭikāṇātu.
   When measured it is not a span long, when chopped up it does not fill a
   chatti.
   461. aḷantu aḷanta nāḻi oḻintu oḻintu varum.
   By repeated measurement articles will be diminished.
   Constant use wears out a thing.
   462. aḷavaḷāvillātavaṉ vāḻkkai kuḷavaḷāk kōṭiṉṟi nīr niṟaintaṟṟu.
   The prosperity of him who does not cultivate sociality is like the
   filling of a tank without a bank.
   463. aḷavukku miñciṉāl amirtamum nañcu.
   If in excess even nectar is poison.
   464. aḷḷātu kuṟaiyātu collātu piṟavā tu.
   That of which no part is taken out will not lessen, that which is not
   uttered will not get out.
   465. aḷḷik koṭuttāl cummā, aḷantuk koṭuttāl kaṭaṉ.
   If taken up and given in handsful it is free, if measured out it is
   charged for.
   466. aḷḷip pāl vārkkaiyilē collip pāl vārttirukkutu.
   Whilst teeming milk already laded, the quantity is given.
   467. aḷḷukiṟavaṉ iṭattil irukkal ākātu kiḷḷukiṟavaṉ iṭattil iruntālum.
   One cannot afford to live with a plunderer though he might live with a
   pilferer.
   468. aḷḷuvatu ellām nāy taṉakkeṉṟu eṇṇumām.
   It is said that a dog imagines every thing taken up by the hand is
   intended for himself.
   469. aṟakkāttāṉ peṇṭiḻantāṉ aṟukātavaḻi cumantu aḻutāṉ.
   An over-suspicious man lost his wife and carried her sixty miles,
   weeping.
   Some mischievous persons having concealed her in a box employed him to
   carry it to the sea-shore.
   470. aṟakkuḻaittālum kuḻaippāḷ ariciyāy iṟakkiṉālum iṟakkuvāḷ.
   She will over-boil the rice; or she will boil it imperfectly.
   471. aṟakkūrmai maḻu moṭṭai.
   Excessive sharpness is perfect bluntness.
   472. aṟacceṭṭu muḻu naṣṭam.
   Hard dealing ends in loss.
   473. aṟaṇai alaku tiṟavātu.
   The streaked lizard opens not its mouth.
   474. aṟaṇai kaṭittāl maraṇam.
   If a streaked lizard bite, death ensues.
   475. aṟattāl varuvatē iṉpam.
   That is happiness which springs from virtue.
   476. aṟanaṉaintavarukkuk kūtal eṉṉa ?
   No cold to them that are completely wet.
   477. aṟappēci uṟavāṭa vēṇṭum.
   On a full understanding of the party admit to friendship.
   478. aṟappaṭittavar aṅkāṭi pōṉāl viṟkavumāṭṭār koḷḷavum māṭṭār.
   When the hypercritical go to market they neither buy norsell.
   479. aṟappaṭittavar kūḻppāṉaiyil viḻuntār.
   One highly learned fell into a pot of gruel.
   480. aṟappattiṉi āmuṭaiyāṉai appā eṉṟu aḻaitta katai.
   The story of a scrupulousy chaste wife who addressed her husband as
   Appa, father.
   481. aṟappaṭitta mūñcūṟu kaḻunīrppāṉaiyil viḻuntatu pōl.
   As the thoroughly practised musk-rat was drowned in the refuse-pan.
   482. aṟamuṟukkiṉāl koṭumuṟukkākum.
   When twisted to excess, fibres snap.
   483. aṟamuṟukkiṉāl aṟṟuppōkum.
   If over-twisted it will snap.
   484. aṟamuṟukkuk koṭumpuri koṇṭu aṟṟuviṭum.
   When excessively twisted, strands break.
   485. aṟam poruḷ iṉpam ellārukkum illai.
   Virtue, wealth and pleasure are not common to all.
   486. aṟavaṭitta muṉ cōṟu kāṭippāṉaiyil viḻuntāṟpōla.
   As when being thoroughly strained the uppermost portion of the boiled
   rice fell into the refuse-pan.
   487. aṟavum koṭuṅkōlaracaṉkīḻk kuṭiyiruppiṟ kuṟavaṉkīḻk kuṭiyiruppu.
   (Better) to live in subjection to a mountaineer than to be the subject
   of a cruel tyrant.
   488. aṟiñarkkaḻaku akattuṇarntu aṟital.
   It is the merit of the wise to gain knowledge by meditation.
   489. aṟinta āṇṭaiyeṉṟu kumpiṭap pōṉāl, uṅkaḷ appaṉ pattup paṇam
   koṭukkavēṇṭum koṭu eṉṟāṉ.
   When I went to a master whom I knew, to pay my respects, he said, your
   father owes tan fanams, give it me.
   490. aṟinta pārppāṉ cinēkitaṉ āṟu kācukku mūṉṟu tōcaiyā?
   A known brahman is a friend ; are there only three pancakes for six
   cash?
   Said of taking advantage of previous acquaintance in a bargain.
   491. aṟintum keṭṭēṉ aṟiyāmalum keṭṭēṉ coṟintu puṇ āyiṟṟu.
   Knowingly and unknowingly I have been ruined; scratching has caused
   sores.
   492.aṟintavaṉeṉṟu kumpiṭa aṭimai vaḻakkiṭṭa katai.
   The story of one who claimed as his slave the man who had paid his
   respects to him because he was an acquaintance.
   493. aṟiya aṟiyak keṭuvār uṇṭā ?
   Do any become vicious by increasing knowledge ?
   494.aṟiyāta nāḷ ellām piṟavāta nāḷ.
   All the days before the age of discretion are as the days before birth.
   495. aṟiyāmal tāṭiyai vaḷarttu ampaṭṭaṉ kaiyiṟ koṭukkavā?
   Have I grown my beard not knowing that it would fall into the hands of
   the barber ?
   Said with reference to the loss of a cherished object.
   496. aṟiyāp piḷḷaip puttiyaippōla.
   Like the idea of an innocent child.
   497. aṟivīṉaṉiṭattil putti kēḷātē.
   Do not ask advice of the ignorant.
   498. aṟivīṉar tamakku āyiram uraikkiṉum avam.
   Though fools are told a thousand times the thing is useless.
   499. aṟivu ār aṟivār? āyntār aṟivār.
   Who possesses information? Those who have examined a thing thoroughly.
   500. aṟivu illātavaṉ peṇṭukaḷiṭattilum tāḻvupaṭuvāṉ.
   An ignorant man is despised even by women.
   501. aṟivu illāc cayaṉam amparattilum illai.
   So to sleep as to be incapable of feeling is an impossibility.
   502: aṟivu peruttōṉ nōy peruttōṉ.
   He that increaseth knowledge increasethsorrow.
   503. aṟivu illārkku āṇmaiyum illai.
   The ignorant are not manly.
   504. aṟivu puṟampōya ulaṇṭatu pōla.
   As a chrysalis destitute of intelligence.
   505. aṟivuṭaṉ ñāṉam aṉpuṭaṉ oḻukkam.
   Wisdom is regulated by knowledge, good conduct by love.
   506. aṟivu maṉatai arikkum.
   Conscious guilt will fret the heart.
   507. aṟivu tarum vāyum aṉpu uraikkum nāvum.
   Amouth that instructs and a tongue uttering words of love.
   Spoken of one characterized by wisdom and love.
   508. aṟivuṭaiyārai aracaṉum virumpum.
   Even a king will approve of wise men.
   509. aṟivuṭaiyārai aṭuttāṟ pōtum.
   To obtain the favour of the wise is enough.
   510. aṟivēṉ aṟivēṉ ālilai puḷiyilai pōl irukkum.
   I know, I know (i. e., I know it well) the leaf of the banyan tree is
   like that of the tamarind tree.
   511. aṟukkamāṭṭātavaṉ araiyil aimpatteṭṭu arivāḷ.
   Fifty-eight sickles on the hip of one that cannot reap.
   Used in contempt of mere show and parade.
   512. aṟutali makaṉukku aṅkam ellām cēṭṭai.
   The son of a widow has evil gestures throughout his body.
   Said of persons irreclaimably and naturally vicious.
   513. aṟutta kōḻi tuṭikkumāppōla.
   Fluttering as a fowl with its throat cut.
   514. aṟuttavaḷ āṇpiḷḷai peṟṟa katai.
   The story of a widow who gave birth to a son.
   515. aṟupatu nāḷaikku eḻupatu kantai.
   Seventy rags for sixty days.
   516. aṟupattu nālu aṭik kampattiṉ mēl āṭiṉālum, kīḻē vantu tiyākam
   vāṅkavēṇṭum.
   Although one may balance himself on a pole sixty-four feet high, he has
   to descend to receive gifts.
   517. aṟupatteṭṭuk kōrampalam.
   Sixty-eight tricks.
   Said of the various impediments which one meets with in carrying out a
   scheme.
   518. aṟuppuk kālattil elikkum aintu peṇcāti.
   In harvest time even a rat has five wives.
   519. aṟuvāykku vāy peritu, aricikkuk koti peritu.
   The mouth of the rice-pot being enlarged by fracture, the rice must be
   boiled the longer.
   520. aṟaiyil āṭi allavō ampalattil āṭa vēṇṭum?
   One must appear in the assembly, must he not, after having practised
   privately?
   521. aṟaiyil irukkiṟavarkaḷai ampalattil ēṟṟukiṟa puraṭṭaṉ.
   One who leads private persons into a place of justice and perverts
   judgment.
   522. aṟpa ācai kōṭi tavattaik keṭukkum.
   The least unlawful desire destroys a myriad acts of austerity.
   523. aṟpattiṟku aḻaku kulaikiṟatā?
   Is beauty (self-respect) to be forfeited for a mere trifle ?
   524. aṟpat tuṭaippamāṉālum akattūciyai aṭakkum.
   Although the broom is inferior it will lay the dust in the house.
   525. aṟpar cinēkitam pirāṇa kaṇṭitam.
   The friendship of the mean will issue in fatal results.
   526. aṟpar cinēkam pirāṇa caṅkaṭam.
   The friendship of the base is dangerous.
   527. aṟpaṉukku aisvariyam vantāl arttarāttiriyil kuṭaippiṭippāṉ.
   If a low-bred man obtain wealth, he will carry an umbrella at midnight.
   528. aṟpaṉ paṇam paṭaittāl vaikka vakai aṟiyāṉ.
   When a mean person acquires wealth he knows not how to take care of it.
   529. aṟṟattukku uṟṟa tāy.
   Fitted to the opportunity.
   530. aṉal kuḷir vetuvetuppu immūṉṟu kālamum āṟu kālattiṟkuḷ aṭakkam.
   Three kinds of weather, hot, cold and temperate are included in the six
   seasons.
   A year is divided into six seasons of two months each, beginning with
   August. The names of the seasons are 1. kār,cloudy. 2 kūtir, cold. 3.
   muṉ paṉi, evening dew. 4. piṉ paṉi, morning dew. 5. iḷa vēṉil, mild
   heat. 6. mutuvēṉil, very hot.
   531. aṉupōkam tolaintāl aṟpa aviḻtamum palikkum.
   Even a common medicine may prove effectual after a disease has passed
   the crisis.
   532. aṉpaṟṟa māmiyārukkuk kāl paṭṭālum kuṟṟam, kai paṭṭālum kuṟṟam.
   The touch whether of the foot or the hand is an offence to one's unkind
   mother-in-law.
   533. aṉpaṟṟa māmiyārukkuk kumpiṭum kuṟṟantāṉ.
   Even obeisance is an offence to an unloving mother-in-law.
   534. aṉpaṟṟār vācalilē piṉpaṟṟip pōkātē.
   Don't enter the portal of the uncharitable.
   535. aṉpāṉa cinēkitaṉai āpattilē aṟi.
   Know a loving friend in adversity.
   536. aṉpillār tamakku ātikkam illai.
   They who are destitute of love are void of influence.
   537. aṉpuḷḷa kuṇam alaiyillā nati.
   A loving disposition is a river without a ripple.
   538. aṉpu iruntāl ākātum ākum.
   Where love reigns the impossible may be attained.
   539. aṉpuṭaiyāṉaik koṭuttu alaiyaccē acal vīṭṭukkāraṉ vantu aḻaitta
   katai.
   The story of a neighbour who invited a woman in distress at the loss of
   her husband.
   540. aṉpē piratāṉam atuvē vekumāṉam.
   Love is all-important, and it is it's own reward.
   541. aṉṟṟa āyiram poṉṉilum, niṉṟaṟa oru kācu peritu.
   A single cash saved is greater than thousands of gold spent as soon as
   acquired.
   542. aṉṟiṟukkalām niṉṟirukkalākātu.
   Pay at once, delay is bad.
   543. aṉṟu kaṇṭa mēṉikku aḻivu illai.
   The body we then saw has suffered no decay.
   The word mēṉiis also used for beauty, freshness.
   544. aṉṟum illait taiyal, iṉṟum illaip pottal.
   There was no stitching then, nor is there any hole now.
   545. aṉṟu koḷ , niṉṟukoḷ, eṉṟum koḷḷātē.
   Buy when you require, be slow to make purchases, do not make daily
   purchases.
   546. aṉṟu tiṉṟa cōṟu āṟu mātattiṟku āmā ?
   Will the boiled rice eaten then suffice for six months ?
   547. aṉṟu tiṉṟa ūṇ āṟu mācattup paciyai aṟukkum.
   The food which was then eaten will keep one free from hunger for six
   months.
   548. aṉṟu eḻutiṉavaṉ aḻittu eḻutuvāṉā?
   Will he who wrote then, erase and write again?
   Referring to the changeless preordination of God.
   549. aṉṟaikkuk kiṭaikkiṟa āyiram poṉṉilum iṉṟaikkuk kiṭaitta araikkācu
   peritu.
   The half cash obtained to-day is greater than thousands of gold to be
   got hereafter.
   550. aṉṟaikkut tiṉkiṟa palākkāyaiviṭa iṉṟaikkut tiṉkiṟakaḷākkāy peritu.
   The Kala fruit, carissa diffusa, of to-day is better than the jack
   fruit of the future.
   551. aṉṉap piṭi vellap piṭi āccutu.
   A handful of boiled rice has become as precious as a handful of sugar.
   552. aṉṉa mayam pirāṇa mayam.
   The property of food is the support of life.
   The supporting, nourishing quality of grain is its special property,
   without which, as life is now conditioned, it cannot exist.
   553. aṉṉa mayam iṉṟip piṉṉai mayam illai.
   There is no physical virtue in aught but food.
   The same as the preceding.
   554. aṉṉam mikak koḷvāṉum āṭai aḻukku āvāṉum patar.
   The glutton and the sloven are alike worthless.
   555. aṉṉam iṭṭār vīṭṭil kaṉṉam iṭalāmā?
   May we break through the wall of the house of those who fed us?
   556. aṉṉam oṭuṅkiṉāl añcum oṭuṅkum.
   When food fails, the five senses fail.
   Referring to the exercise of the senses as dependent on the health of
   the body and its dependence on food.
   557. aṉṉa naṭai naṭakkap pōyt taṉ naṭaiyum keṭṭāṟpōla.
   As in attempting to walk like a swan, the crow lost even its natural
   gait.
   558. aṉṉam muṭṭāṉāl ellām muṭṭu.
   When food or grain is scarce, all is scarce.
   559. aṉṉappālukkuc ciṅkiyaṭittavaḷ āviṉ pālukkuc carkkarai tēṭukiṟāḷ.
   She who was wandering about for rice water, is seeking sugar to mix in
   cow's milk.
   560. aṉṉatāṉattiṟkuc cari eṉṉa tāṉam irukkiṟatu?
   What gift is there that equals the gift of food ?
   561. aṉṉiya mātar avatikku utavār.
   Strange women will not avail in adversity.
   562. aṉṉaikku utavātāṉ ārukku utavuvāṉ?
   Whom will he help that does not help his mother?
   563. asta cemmāṉam aṭaimaḻaikku lakṣaṇam.
   A crimson sunset betokens abiding rain.
   564. astimacakāntaram eṉṟatu pōl irukkiṟatu.
   The difference is as great as that between an elephant and a mosquito.
   565. ākaṭiyakkāraṉ pōkaṭiyāyp pōvāṉ.
   A scoffer will be destroyed.
   566. ākāta nāḷaiyil piḷḷai piṟantāl, aṇṭai vīṭṭukkāraṉai eṉṉaceyyum?
   If a child be born at an inauspicious time what evil will it occasion
   to a neighbour ?
   567. ākāta pañcāṅkattukku aṟupatu nāḻikaiyum tiyācciyam.
   In a false almanac, the sixty hours are to be rejected.
   In astrological calculations a time of three and three quarters to four
   Indian hours (nāḻi - 24 minutes) for the asterism that rules the day is
   considered unlucky: it is called tiyācciyam rejected. An imperfect or
   uncertain formula should be wholly rejected.
   568. ākātavaṉ kuṭiyai aṭuttuk keṭukka vēṇṭum.
   The family of the wicked must be destroyed by associating with it.
   569. ākātavaṟṟai ēṟṟāl ārāyntu ēṟṟukkoḷ.
   If about to undertake a difficult work do so after due inquiry.
   570. ākāttiyakkāraṉukkup piramakattikkāraṉ cāṭciyā?
   Is a brahmanicide a suitable witness for an abandoned wretch ?
   571. ākāyattukku maiyam kāṭṭukiṟatu pōla.
   Like pointing out the middle of the sky. An impossibility.
   572. ākāyattaip paruntu eṭuttukkoṇṭu pōkumā?
   Can a hawk carry away the sky?
   573. ākāyattil paṟakka upatēcippēṉ, eṉṉait tūkki āṟṟukku appāl viṭu
   eṉkiṟāṉ kuru.
   The spiritual guide observed, I will teach you how to fly through the
   air, take me up and convey me to the other side of the river.
   574. ākāya valliṭi atira iṭikkum.
   A powerful thunder-clap will occasion tremor.
   575. ākāyamaṭṭum aḷakkum irupputtūṇaic cellarikkumā?
   Will white ants destroy an iron pillar that reaches to the clouds ?
   The proverb was used by Sita when speaking to Ravana.
   576. ākāyam pārkkappōyum iṭumuṭukkā?
   Is there not sufficient space for one to go and look at the sky ?
   577. ākāyattai vaṭuppaṭak kaṭikkalāmā?
   Can the air be bit so as to leave a mark ?
   578. ākāyam peṟṟatu, pūmi tāṅkiṉatu.
   The sky brought forth, the earth supported.
   579. ākiṟa kālattil aviḻtam palikkum.
   If favoured by fortune medicine will take effect in due time.
   580. ākuṅkālattil aṭiyāḷum peṇ peṟuvāḷ.
   In times of prosperity, even a slave woman may bring forth a
   female child.
   581.ākuṅkāy piñcilē teriyum.
   A sound fruit may be known when it begins to set.
   582. ākuṅkālam ākum, pōkuṅkālam pōkum.
   In auspicious times it succeeds, in inauspicious times it fails.
   583. ākkap poṟuttavaṉ āṟap poṟāṉā?
   Will he who waited till it was cooked, not wait till it cools?
   584. ākkiṟ kuḻaippēṉ, ariciyāy iṟakkuvēṉ.
   Should I cook I shall spoil the rice, either by under or over doing it.
   585. ākkiṉaiyum ceṅkōlum aṟṟatu arai nāḻikaiyil.
   Rule will last but half an hour where discipline and authority do not
   exist.
   586. ākkukiṟavaḷ calittāl aṭuppup pāḻ, kuttukiṟavaḷ calittāl kuntāṇi
   pāḻ.
   If the cook be weary, the hearth will be useless ; if she who pounds
   the rice be weary the mortar will be useless.
   587. āṅkārikaḷukku atikāri.
   The chief of the proud.
   588. āṅkālam ellām avacāri āṭic cāṅkālam caṅkarā caṅkarā eṉkiṟāḷ.
   She exclaims Sangara, Sangara at death having through life been given
   up to lewd behaviour.
   589. ācaritta teyvam ellām aṭiyōṭē māṇṭatu.
   All the deities that were venerated have entirely perished.
   590. ācāram illā acaṭaruṭaṉ kūṭip pācāṅku pēcip pati iḻantu pōṉēṉ.
   By being associated with the base and by speaking hypocritically I have
   forfeited my dwelling-place.
   591. ācīrvātamum cāpamum aṟavōrkku illai.
   The virtuous are not affected by blessing and cursing.
   592. ācai avaḷ mēlē ātaravu pāy mēlē.
   His mind is fixed upon her, his body is on the mat.
   593. ācai aṟupatu nāḷ, mōkam muppatu nāḷ, toṇṇūṟu nāḷum pōṉāl
   tuṭaippakkaṭṭai.
   Sixty days of excessive desire, thirty of enjoyment; when the ninety
   are over, the remaining time is as useless as a worn-out broom.
   594. ācai aṇṭātākil, aḻukaiyum aṇṭātu.
   If evil desire spring not sorrow will not approach.
   595. ācai uṇṭāṉāl pūcai uṇṭu.
   If there be heartfelt love, there will be deferential regard.
   Spoken of a devoted wife who has a cruel husband.
   596. ācai uḷḷaḷavum alaiccalum uṇṭu.
   As long as desire continues, there will be anxiety also.
   597. ācai koṇṭa pērukku rōcam illai.
   Persons of inordinate desire have no shame.
   598. ācaikku aḷavillai.
   Desire has no limits.
   599. ācai colli mōcam ceykiṟatā?
   Is it to deceive after using enticing words ?
   600. ācai nōvukku aviḻtam ētu?
   What remedy is there for love-sickness ?
   601. ācai peruka alaiccalum perukum.
   As desire increases, anxiety increases.
   602, ācai peritō , malai peritō?
   Which is greater, (human) desire or a mountain?
   603. ācaippaṭṭatu ūcippōyiṟṟu.
   What was desired is now disgusting.
   604. ācaiyellām tīra aṭittāḷ muṟattālē.
   She beat him with the winnowing fan to banish all his desires.
   605. ācai veṭkam aṟiyātu.
   Desire knows not shame.
   606. ācai vaittāl nācam.
   Cherished desire ends in ruin.
   607. ācci ācci mettap paṭittup pēcātē.
   O mother, mother, do not speak so much.
   ācci in 3 Provincialism for āyi.
   608. āṭap pāṭat teriyātu iraṇṭu paṅku uṇṭu.
   Neither able to sing nor dance, but he has two shares.
   609. āṭamāṭṭāta tēvaṭiyāḷ kūṭam pōtātu eṉṟāḷ.
   The temple girl who could not dance said that the hall was not large
   enough.
   610. āṭaviṭṭu nāṭakam pārkkiṟatā?
   Is it to look at the drama after having encouraged a profligate course?
   Spoken ironically.
   611. āṭā jāti kūṭājātiyā?
   Are those unfit for the drama unfit for every thing.
   612 āṭātu ellām āṭi avaraikkāyum aṟuttāccutu.
   All is done and the avarai fruit is cut ?
   Indicating decayed circumstances.
   613. āṭi aṟaveṭṭai akavilai nelvilai.
   July harvest having failed, the price of dry grain is that of paddy.
   614. āṭi amarntatu kūttu oru nāḻikaiyil.
   The comedy began and ended in an hour.
   615. āṭi ōynta pamparam.
   A top that spins no longer.
   616. āṭik karu aḻintāl maḻai kuṟaintu pōm.
   If the embryo clouds of July fail rain will be scant.
   617. āṭikkaṟakkiṟa māṭṭai āṭik kaṟakkavēṇṭum, pāṭik kaṟakkiṟa māṭṭaip
   pāṭik kaṟakka vēṇṭum.
   A restless cow must be milked by force, and a gentle cow must be milked
   with kindness.
   Treatment to be regulated by circumstances.
   618. āṭikkāṟṟil utirum carukupōla.
   As dry leaves falling in the winds of July.
   619. āṭikkāṟṟil ecciṟ kallaikku vaḻiyā?
   Is there any way of escape for a leaf-plate before the wind of July?
   620. āṭikkāṟṟilē ilavampañcu paṟantatu pōl.
   Like silk-cotton scattered by the wind of July.
   621. āṭikku aḻaikkāta māmiyārait tēṭi mayiraip piṭittuc ceruppāl aṭi.
   Seek, seize her by the hair, and slipper a mother-in-law who does not
   invite you in July.
   The parents of a newly married woman separate her from her husband,
   that she may be under their care during the first year of marriage, in
   the month of July. This is necessary to prevent conception in that
   month and delivery in the following April. The birth of a first child
   in April if a son is believed to bring ruin upon a family.
   622. āṭimācattil kuttiṉa kuttu āvaṇimācattil uḷaivu eṭuttatām.
   They say that the cuff was given in July, and the pain felt in August.
   623. āṭiya kālum pāṭiya miṭaṟum.
   A dancing foot and a singing throat.
   624. āṭi vitai tēṭippōṭu.
   Provide seed-corn and sow in July.
   625. āṭu irukka iṭaiyaṉai viḻuṅkumā?
   While there are sheep will it (the tiger or wolf) swallow the shepherd.
   626. āṭu eṭutta kaḷḷaṉaip pōlē viḻikkiṟāṉ.
   He stares like a thief who has stolen a sheep.
   627. āṭu kaṭikkiṟateṉṟu iṭaiyaṉ uṟiyēṟip patuṅkukiṟāṉ.
   The shepherd is trembling aloft fearing the sheep may bite him.
   628. āṭu kāṟpaṇam vāl mukkāṟpaṇam.
   The price of the sheep is a quarter of a fanam that of its tail three
   fourths of a fanam.
   629. āṭu kiṭanta iṭattilē mayirtāṉum kiṭaiyāmaṟ pōyiṟṟu.
   Not even hair is found where sheep were penned.
   630. āṭu kiṭanta iṭamum akampaṭiyāṉ irunta iṭamum uruppaṭātu.
   A place where sheep were penned and a place once occupied by an
   Agambadyan are profitless.
   631. āṭukiṭanta iṭattil paḻupputtāṉum kiṭaiyātu.
   Not a leaf will be found where the sheep lay.
   632. āṭu koḻukkiṟatu ellām iṭaiyaṉukku lāpam.
   The fattening of the sheep is an advantage to the shepherd.
   633. āṭu koṇṭavaṉ āṭittirivāṉ, kōḻi koṇṭavaṉ kūvittirivāṉ. He that has
   bought a sheep will wander about; he that has boughtfowls will go about
   crying them for sale.
   634. āṭu koṭāta iṭaiyaṉ āvaik koṭuppāṉā?
   Will the shepherd who refused to give a sheep give a cow ?
   635. āṭu kōṉāṉiṉṟit tāṉāyp pōkumā?
   Will a sheep lead itself when the shepherd is absent.
   636. āṭuṅkālam talaikīḻāy viḻuntālum kūṭum pucipputtāṉ kūṭum.
   Though he may fall headlong when dancing, he will not thereby
   meet with greater success.
   637. āṭuṅkālattut talaikīḻāka viḻuntāl ōṭum kapparaiyum uṭaiyavaṉ āvāṉ.
   If one should fall headlong when he ought to be active, he will be so
   impoverished as to possess only broken pots and an alms-dish.
   Indolence in youth leads to poverty in old age.
   638. āṭutavumā kurukkaḷē eṉṟāl, kompum kuḷampum taviraccamūlamum ākum
   eṉkiṟār.
   If one say, O my teacher, can the sheep be of any use to you, he
   replies yes, all except the horns and the hoofs.
   639. āṭu taḻai tiṉpatupōlē.
   Like a goat cropping leaves.
   640. āṭu naṉaikiṟateṉṟu kōṉāy aḻukiṟatām.
   It is said that the wolf wept because the sheep were wet.
   641. āṭu niṉaitta iṭattil paṭṭi pōṭukiṟatā?
   Will the pen be put up where the sheep may wish ?
   642. āṭu piḻaittāl mayirtāṉum koṭāṉ.
   If the sheep should recover, he will not give even a hair.
   Said where benefits are not requited.
   643. āṭu vīṭṭilē āṭṭukkuṭṭi kāṭṭilē.
   The dam at home, the lamb in the jungle.
   644. āṭai illātavaṉ arai maṉitaṉ.
   He who is naked is but half a man.
   Self-respect essential.
   645. āṭaiyait tiṉṟāl veṇṇey uṇṭā?
   If the cream be consumed, can butter be obtained ?
   646. āṭkāṭṭi contakkāraṉaiyum tiruṭaṉaiyum kāṭṭikkoṭukkum.
   The lapwing will by it’s cries betray whether he who approaches be the
   owner or a thief.
   647. āṭkāṭṭi teriyāmal tiruṭappōkiṟavaṉ keṭṭikkāraṉō, avaṉ aṟiyāmal
   avaṉ kālaṭipiṭittup pōkiṟavaṉ ke ṭṭikkāraṉō?
   Which is the cleverer, the thief that goes out to steal taking care
   that the lapwing does not see him, or he that follows the track of that
   thief ?
   648. āṭṭāḷukku oru mōṭṭāḷ.
   A stupid servant to a shepherd.
   649. āṭṭil āyiram, māṭṭil āyiram, vīṭṭilē karaṇṭi pāl illai .
   Possessed of sheep by the thousand, of cattle by the thousand, he has
   not a spoonful of milk at home.
   650. āṭṭukku vāl aḷavaṟuttu vaittirukkiṟatu.
   The tail of the sheep is proportioned to its size.
   651. āṭṭukkum māṭṭukkum iraṇṭu kompu, aiyampiṭārikku mūṉṟu kompu.
   Sheep and oxen have two horns, an Aiyampidari has three.
   652. āṭṭukkut tōṟkumā kiḻappu?
   Can an old tiger be overcome by a sheep?
   653. āṭṭukkum māṭṭukkumuṟaiyā, kāṭṭukkum pāṭṭukkum varaiyā?
   Are relationships observed among, sheep. and oxen? have woods and
   uncultivated tracts any line of demarkation?
   654. āṭṭukkiṭaiyilē kōṉāy pukuntatupōla.
   As the wolf entered the sheepfold.
   655. āṭṭukkut tīrntapaṭi kuṭṭikkum ākiṟatu.
   The fate of the lamb is that of its dam.
   656. āṭṭuttalaikku vaṇṇāṉ paṟakkiṟatu pōla.
   As the washerman flies at the sheep's head.
   657. āṭṭu veṇṇey āṭṭu mūḷaikkum kāṇātu.
   The butter the sheep yields is not enough (to stew) the marrow with.
   658. āṭṭuvittup pampai koṭṭukiṟāṉ.
   He causes them to dance and beats the drum.
   659. āṭṭuk kuṭṭi mēl āyiram poṉṉā?
   What, thousands of gold for a young sheep?
   660. āṭṭukkuṭṭikku āṉaiyaik kāvukoṭu.
   Sacrifice an elephant for the sake of a kid.
   661. āṭṭukkuṭṭiyait tōḷilē vaittuk kāṭeṅkum tēṭiṉa katai.
   The story of one who wandered through the jungle in search of a lamb
   that he had on his shoulder.
   662 āṭṭaik kāṭṭi vēṅkai piṭikkap pārkkiṟāṉ.
   He aims to catch the leopard by exposing the sheep.
   663. āṭṭait tēṭi ayalāḷ kaiyiṟ koṭuppataippārkka, vīṭṭaik kaṭṭi neruppu
   vaippatu nallatu.
   It is better to build a house and set fireto it, than to buy sheep and
   place them under the care of others.
   664. āṭṭaikkorumuṟai kāṇac cōṭṭai illaiyō?
   Have you no desire to see us at least once a year ?
   665. āṇamum kaṟiyum aṭukkōṭē vēṇṭum.
   Broth and curry ought to be prepared with all their ingredients.
   666. āṇavattāl aḻiyātē.
   Do not destroy yourself by pride.
   667.āṇikku iṇaṅkiṉa poṉṉum māmikku iṇaṅkiṉa peṇṇum arumai. Standard
   gold,and a woman at one with her mother-in-law are rare.
   668. āṇukku avakēṭu ceytālum peṇṇukkup piḻaikēṭu ceyyalākātu.
   Although one may injurer a man; a woman may not be injuriously treated.
   669.āṇai aṭittu vaḷar, peṇṇaip pōṟṟi vaḷar.
   Train a boy strictly, but a girl kindly.
   670. āṇaiyum vēṇṭām cattiyamum vēṇṭām tuṇiyaippōṭṭut tāṇṭu. Neither
   swearing nor oathsare required, put down the cloth and stride over it.
   671. āṇṭa poruḷai aṟiyātār ceyta tavam māṇṭa marattukku aṇaitta maṇ.
   The austerity of those who are ignorant of the Supreme is as profitless
   as soil at the foot of a dead tree.
   672. āṇṭārukkuk koṭukkiṟaiyō curaikkuṭukkaikkuk koṭukkiṟaiyō?
   Do you give to mendicants, or to the hard shell of the bottle-gourd ?
   673. āṇṭār irukkumaṭṭum āṭṭum kūttum.
   While the head of a family lives, prosperity may be enjoyed.
   674. āṇṭikaḷ kūṭi maṭam kaṭṭiṉāṟpōla.
   Like mendicants combining to build a choultry.
   675. āṇṭi kiṭappāṉ maṭattilē cōḷikiṭakkum teruvilē.
   The mendicant lies in the choultry and his bag in the street.
   676. āṇṭikku iṭac coṉṉāl tātaṉukku iṭaccollukiṟāṉ.
   When told to give rice to the Saiva mendicant, he says give it to the
   Vaishnava mendicant.
   677. āṇṭikku vāyppēccu pārppāṉukku atuvum illai.
   To the religious mendicant a word, to the brahman not even that.
   678. āṇṭicci peṟṟa añcum avam.
   The five children borne by the mendicant's wife are all weakling.
   679. āṇṭi makaṉ āṇṭiyāṉāl nēram aṟintu caṅku ūtuvāṉ
   When the son of a mendicant assumes a mendicant's profession, he will
   blow his conch at the proper time.
   680. āṇṭiyai aṭittāṉām kuṭuvaiyai uṭaittāṉām.
   It is said that he beat the mendicants and broke his alms-dish.
   681.āṇṭiyum tātaṉum tōṇṭiyum kayiṟum.
   The Saivite and the Vaishnavite mendicants are sa a water-pot and its
   cord.
   United or separate.
   682. āṇṭiyaik kaṇṭāl liṅkaṉ eṉkiṟāṉ, tātaṉaik kaṇṭāl
   raṅkaṉ eṉkiṟāṉ.
   When he meets a Saiva mendicant be is a Lingan, and when he meets a
   Vaishnava mendicant he is a Rangan.
   683. āṇṭiyum āṇṭiyum kaṭṭikkoṇṭāl cāmpalum cāmpalum oṭṭikkoḷḷum.
   When two mendicants embrace each other, the ashes of the one cleave to
   the other.
   684. āṇṭi vēṣam pōṭṭum alaiccal tīravillai.
   Though he assumed the guise of a mendicant, his troubles did not cease.
   685. āṇṭi kuṇṭiyait taṭṭiṉāl paṟappatu cāmpal.
   If a mendicant be struck on his posteriors, ashes fly.
   686. āṇṭu māṟiṉ kārum aṉṟu aṟutta campāvum āḷaṉ kaṇṇukku aritu.
   Kar rice a year old, and newly reaped Samba (superior rice) are rare to
   the eye of a cultivator.
   687. āṇṭu maṟuttāl tōṭṭiyum kumpiṭāṉ.
   If the year withhold her increase, even tho menial servants willneglect
   to do obeisance.
   688. āṇṭaimēṟ kōpam kaṭāviṉ mēl āṟiṉāṉ.
   He wreaked his anger against his master on the male buffalo.
   689. āṇpiḷḷaikaḷ āyiram ottiruppārkaḷ, akkāḷ taṅkaicci ottirārkaḷ.
   A thousand men may live together in harmony, whereas two women are
   unable to do so although they be sisters.
   690. āṇmaiyaṟṟa vīraṉ āyutattiṉ mēṟ kuṟai colluvāṉ.
   The coward blames his weapon.
   691. ātaravaṟṟa vārttaiyum āṇikiṭāvāta kaimaramum palaṉ ceyyātu.
   A comfortless word, and a palmira rafter without a bolt are of no use.
   692. ātāyamillāta ceṭṭi āṟṟōṭē pōvāṉā?
   Will a chetty (a merchant,) take his departure by a river without gain
   ?
   693. ātāyamillāta ceṭṭi āṟṟaik kaṭṭi iṟaippāṉā?
   Will a chetty dam up a river and drain out its waters for nothing?
   694. ātīṉakkāraṉukkuc cātaṉam vēṇṭumā?
   Is a man possessed of landed property without a legal instrument?
   695. āttirakkāraṉukkup putti maṭṭu.
   The over-hasty is wanting in sense.
   696. āttirakkāraṉ kōttiram aṟivāṉā?
   Will the over-hasty be nice about family pedigrees ?
   697. āttirappaṭṭavaṉukku appōtu iṉpam.
   The hasty is gratified at the instant.
   698. āttai paṭukiṟa pāṭṭukkuḷḷē makaṉ mōrukku aḻukiṟāṉ.
   While his mother is in extremity, her grown up son is crying for
   butter-milk.
   699. āstiyillātavaṉ araimaṉitaṉ.
   Ho who possesses no property is but half a man.
   700. āstiyuḷḷavaṉ āstikku aṭimai.
   A man of wealth is the slave of his possessions.
   701. āstiyuḷḷavaṉukku nācam illai.
   The wealthy are not exposed to immediate ruin.
   702. āntai ciṟitu kīccup peritu.
   The owl is small, its screech is loud.
   703. āpattiṟ kāttavaṉ āṇṭavaṉ āvāṉ.
   He who helps another in his misfortune becomes his master.
   704. āpattum campattum ārukkum uṇṭu.
   Prosperity and adversity are common to all.
   705. āpattukkup pāvam illai.
   A thing done through necessity is no crime.
   706. āpattukku utaviṉavaṉē pantu.
   He is a friend who aids in adversity.
   707. āppāttāḷ kalyāṇam pōyppārttāl teriyum.
   The condition of one's elder sister may be ascertained by attending her
   wedding.
   708. āppaip piṭuṅkiṉa kuraṅku nācam aṭaintatupōla.
   As the monkey perished by drawing out a wedge.
   709. āmaṇakku vitaittāl āccā muḷaikkumā?
   If castor seed (palma christi) be sown will achcha (ebony) spring up?
   710. āmaṇakku muttu āṇimuttāmā?
   Are the nuts of the castor plant pearls ?
   711. āmaṇakkum paruttiyum aṭara vitaippāṉā?
   Will he sow Castor and cotton seeds in close proximity ?
   712. āmai kiṇaṟṟilē aṇil kompilē.
   The tortoise or a turtle is in the well, the squirrel is on a branch.
   Said of two things or persons not found together.
   713. āmai piṭippār mallāttuvār nām atu coṉṉāṟ pāvam.
   They will catch the turtle, they will turn it on its back, for me to
   say so would be a crime. Indicating that it is more dangerous to speak
   of the crime of another than to commit it.
   714. āmuṭaiyāṉaik koṉṟa aṟa nīli.
   A most abandoned woman who murdered her own husband.
   715. āmuṭaiyāṉ cettapiṉpu aṟutalikkup putti vantatu.
   The woman became wise after the death of her husband.
   716. āmuṭaiyāṉukku aḻutavaḷukku antukkaṇṇaṉ vantu vāyttāṉ.
   A blear-eyed man became the husband of a woman who had beencrying for
   one.
   717. āmuṭaiyāṉ aṭittataṟku aḻavillai, cakkaḷatti cirippāḷēṉṟu
   aḻukiṟēṉ.I do not weep because my husband has beaten me, but because my
   rival will laugh at me.
   718. āmuṭaiyāṉ cettu avatippaṭukiṟapōtu, aṇṭai vīṭṭuk kāraṉ vantu
   akkuḷil kuttiṉāṉām.
   When in great extremity she was mourning the death of her husband, a
   neighbour came and attempted to tickle her under the arm.
   719. āmuṭaiyāṉ kōppillāk kūttum, kuruvillā ñāṉamum pōl irukkiṟāṉ. The
   husband resembles a merry, making without food and knowledge without a
   competent teacher.
   720. āmuṭaiyāṉ vaṭṭamāy ōṭiṉālum vācalāl varavēṇṭum.
   No matter what the circumambulation of a husband may be, he entershis
   house by the door.
   721. āmuṭaiyāṉukkup poy coṉṉālum aṭuppukkup poy collalāmā?
   True, you may utter a falsehood to your husband, but can you deal
   falsely with the hearth?
   722. āmuṭaiyāṉai vaittukkoṇṭallō avacāriyāṭavēṇṭum?
   It is while she has a husband, is it not, that a woman, should play the
   harlot?
   723. āmuṭaiyāṉ cettavaḷukku maruttuvicci tayavēṉ ?
   Of what use is the favor of a midwife to her who has lost her husband?
   724. āmuṭaiyāṉ palam iruntāl kuppai ēṟic caṇṭai ceyyalām.
   If your husband be a powerful man, you may ascend the dunghill to
   fight.
   725. āmai tiṭaril ēṟiṉāṟpōla.
   As if a tortoise or turtle crept up a hillock.
   726. āmaiyuṭaṉē muyal muṭṭaiyiṭappōyk kaṇpituṅkic cettatām.
   It is said that when the hare went with the tortoise to lay eggs it
   strained its eyes out and died.
   727. āya upāyam aṟintavaṉ aritalla velvatu.
   It is not difficult for one to win who understands the tricks of dice.
   728. āyakkāraṉukkup piramakattikkāraṉ cāṭci.
   The brahmanicide is the witness of the custom officer.
   729. āyakkāraṉ añcu paṇam kēṭpāṉ atāveṭṭukkāraṉ aimpatu paṇam kēṭpāṉ.
   The under-hand extortioner demands fifty fanams whilst the custom
   officer demands five.
   730. āyattilum niyāyam vēṇṭum.
   Even in gain justice is required.
   731. āyattukkuk kutirai kīyattukkuk kuṭṭi.
   Hire for the horse, nothing for its colt.
   732. āyattukkup payantu āṟṟil nīntiṉatu pōla.
   Like swimming the river to avoid the tax.
   733. āyattuṟaiyil aniyāyam ceyyātē.
   Do not commit injustice at the custom-house.
   734. āyirakkalam nellukku ōr antuppūcci pōtum.
   One grain destroying insect will consume a thousand grains of rice.
   735 āyiram kākkaikkuḷ oru aṉṉam akappaṭṭatu pōla.
   As a swan in the midst of a thousand crows.
   736. āyiram kākkaikku oru kalluppōla.
   Like a single stone thrown at a thousand crows.
   737. āyiram kaṭṭu aṇṭattait tāṅkumā ?
   Can a thousand props support the universe ?
   738. āyiram kaṭṭu āṉaippalam.
   A thousand bonds may equal the strength of an elephant.
   739. āyiram coṉṉālum avacāri camucāriyākāḷ.
   Though a thousand-times admonished, afaithless woman will not become a
   faithful wife.
   740. āyirattilē piṟantu aiññūṟṟilē kāl nīṭṭiṉatu pōla.
   Like one born with a thousand stretched out this legs with five
   hundred.
   741. āyirattil oruvaṉē alaṅkārapuruṣaṉ.
   Beauty is found only in one of a thousand.
   742. āyiram naṭcattiram kūṭiṉālum oru cantiraṉ ākātu.
   The combined light of a thousand stars is not equal to a single moon.
   743. āyiram mākāṇi aṟupattiraṇṭarai .
   A thousand sixteenths make sixty-two and a half.
   744. āyiram uṭaiyār amarntiruppār tuṇipoṟukki tontōm tontōm eṉṟu
   kūttāṭuvāṉ.
   He whose fortune amounts to thousands is quiet, while the rag- gatherer
   leaps for joy.
   Dignity is characteristic of the worthy, and levity of the worthless.
   745. āyiram vantālum āyattoḻil ākātu.
   Though it may bring in thousands, the occupation of a tax gatherer is
   bad
   746. āyiram varuṣam ceṉṟu cettālum anītaccā ākātu.
   Although one may live a thousand years an unnatural death is bad.
   747. āyiram vittaikaḷ kaṟṟālum ulakattil āṭamparaṅkaḷ vēṇṭum.
   Although one has acquired a thousand arts, he will still feel the
   necessity of earthly show.
   748. āyiram peyaraik koṉṟavaṉ araivaittiyaṉ.
   He who has killed a thousand persons is half a doctor.
   749. āyiram vantālum āttiram ākātu.
   Though a thousand may thereby be obtained, impetuosity is not good.
   750. āyiram peyar kūṭiṉālum oru antuppūcciyaik kollakkūṭātu.
   Though a thousand persons unite, they cannot kill a single grain
   insect.
   751.āyiram poṉ pōṭṭu yāṉai vāṅki araippaṇattu aṅku cattukkup pāl
   māṟukiṟatā?
   After laying out thousands for an elephant why hesitate to give half a
   fanam for a goad?
   752. āyiram araikkāṟpaṇam.
   A thousand eighths of a fanam.
   753. āyiram collukku arai eḻuttu.
   Half a letter is equal to a thousand words.
   754. āyiram pacukkaḷil oru pacu utaittukkoṇṭāl naṣṭamā?
   Will it prove a loss if one of a thousand cows kicks?
   755.āyiram paṉaiyuḷḷa appaṉukkup piṟantum palluk kutta oru īrkkum
   illai. Although born of a father possessed of a thousand palmira trees,
   he has not a fibre with which to pick his teeth.
   756. āyiram pāmpiṉuḷ oru tērai akappaṭṭāṟpōla.
   Like a toad among a thousand serpents.
   757. āyiram poṉ peṟṟa kutiraikku araippaṇattuc cavukku.
   Half a fanam to buy a whip for a horse worth thousands of gold.
   758. āyiram naṟkuṇam oru lōpa kuṇattāl keṭum.
   A single avaricious desire will destroy a thousand good qualities
   759. āyiram poṉ peṟṟa kutiraikkum cavukkaṭi vēṇṭum.
   Even a horse worth thousands of gold may require a whip.
   760. āyiram poy collik kōyilaik kaṭṭu.
   Tell lies by the thousand and build a temple.
   761. āyutaparīkṣai aṟintavaṉ nūṟṟil oruvaṉ.
   One of a hundred makes a skilful swords-man.
   762. āyutam illārai aṭikkiṟatā?
   What ! strike the unarmed?
   763. āyōtaṉa mukattil āyutam tēṭukiṟatu pōla.
   Like seeking a weapon in the face of battle.
   764. āyccalāyccalāy maḻai peykiṟatu.
   It rains in successive torrents.
   765. āyntu pārātāṉ kāriyam tāṉ cāntuyaram tarum.
   An ill-considered undertaking may occasion the agony of death.
   766. ārakkaḻutti araṇmaṉaikku ākātu.
   A female with an inauspicious mark on the neck will prove an evil in a
   king's palace.
   767. āraṭā viṭṭatu māṉiyam nāṉē viṭṭukkoṇṭēṉ.
   Sirrah! who invested you with a free tenure, I did it myself.
   A long continued favour is regarded as a right.
   768. ārākilum paṭiyaḷantu viṭṭatā?
   Has any one measured out my daily allowance ?
   769. ārārukku āḷāvēṉ ākāta uṭampaiyum puṇṇaiyum koṇṭu.
   How many shall I serve with this debilitated and ulcerated body?
   770. ārāṟ keṭṭēṉ nārāṟ keṭṭēṉ.
   By whom was I ruined, by twisted hemp.
   771.āriyak kūttāṭiṉālum kāriyattiṟ kaṇ vēṇṭum.
   Although engaged in a mere puppet-show, one ought to keep the eye on
   the main chance.
   772. ārukkum añcāṉ ārpaṭaikkum tōlāṉ.
   He is fearless and shrinks not in the presence of any foe.
   773. ārukku ār catam?
   Who is really true to another ?
   774. ārukkup piṟantu mōrukku aḻukiṟāy?
   To whom were you born? you cry for butter-milk.
   775. ārukkākilum turōkam ceytāl aintāṟu nāṭpoṟuttuk kēṭkum,
   āttumatturōkam ceytāl appōtē kēṭkum.
   Treachery against any man will be slowly requited, but treachery
   against one's self will meet with immediate retribution.
   776. ārumaṟṟatē tāram ūril oruvaṉē tōḻaṉ.
   A wife who has no connections is to be preferred and so the friend ship
   of one.
   777. ārum ārum uṟavu? tāyum piḷḷaiyum uṟavu.
   Who are related to each other? the mother and her child.
   778. ārum illāta ūrilē acuvamēta yākam ceytāṉām.
   He is said to have performed Ashwamedha, (the sacrifice of a horse) in
   an uninhabited country.
   779. ārai nampit tōḻā kārukku ēṟṟam pōṭṭāy?
   My friend, on whom did you depend for assistance when you putup a
   picotta to irrigate the kar rice ?
   An efficient picotta is worked by two, frequently by three men.
   780. ārō cettāṉ evaṉō aḻutāṉ.
   Some one died : someone cried.
   781.ār āttāḷ cettatum poḻutu viṭintāl teriyum.
   In the morning it will be known whose mother is dead.
   782. ār kaṭaṉ vaittālum mārikaṭaṉ vaikkakkūṭātu.
   Whomsoever you delay to pay, the debt of Mari must be at once
   discharged.
   Mari is the Goddess who presides over pestilence,&c.
   783. ār kuṭiyaik keṭukka āṇṭivēṣam pōṭṭāy?
   Whose family did you intend to ruin when you assumed the guise of a
   religious mendicant ?
   784. ār kuttiṉālum ariciyāṉāl cari.
   No matter who pounds it if we obtain the rice.
   785. ālakāla viṣam pōṉṟavaṉ antaramāvāṉ.
   He who is as dangerous to society as the poison of a serpent will be
   ruined.
   786. ālaciyam amirtam viṣam.
   Indolence changes nectar into poison.
   787. ālamaram paḻuttateṉṟu paṟavaikku ār cīṭṭaṉuppiṉār?
   Who informed the birds that the banyan tree was in fruit ?
   788. āliṉmēṟ pulluruvi.
   A parasite on a banyan tree.
   789.ālum vēlum pallukku uṟuti nālum iraṇṭum collukku uṟuti.
   As the banyan and the acacia strengthen the teeth, so Naladiyar and
   Kural give force to speech.
   Naladiyar and Kural two celebrated poetie works on moral subjects.
   790. ālaik karumpum vēlait turumpumāṉēṉ.
   I am become a bruised reed tossed on the waves.
   791. ālaiyam aṟiyātu ōtiya vētam.
   The temple understands not the hidden meaning of the Vedas.
   792. ālaiyillā ūrilē iluppaippūc carkkarai.
   The flowers of the olive, Bassia, are regarded as sugar in a place
   without a Sugar cane mill.
   793. ālai viḻutu tāṅkukiṟāppōlē.
   As the pendulous roots of its branches support the banyan tree.
   794.āl paḻuttāl aṅkē aracu paḻuttāl iṅkē.
   If the banyan be in fruit, thither, if the arasu, hither, the birds
   flock.
   795. āl pōl viḻuntuviṭṭu, aṟukupōl vērōṭi mūṅkil pōṟ cuṟṟam muciyāmal
   vāḻntirukka.
   Day you prosper as the banyan with its daughter-stems, take root like
   the wide-spreading arugu grass, and as the bamboo amid unfailing
   friends.
   A congratulatory expression to a newly married couple.
   796. āvaṇi mātam aḻukal tūṟṟal.
   The month of August is attended with incessant drizzling.
   797. āvattai aṭarāṉ pāvattai toṭarāṉ.
   He is not subject to calamity who pursues not a sinful course.
   798. āval māttiram iruntāl eṉṉa, aṉṉam iṟaṅkiṉāl allavōpiḻaippāṉ?
   What avails mere desire, he will live, will be not, if he swallows
   rice?
   799. āvārai ilaiyum āpattukkutavum.
   Even the leaves of the avárai may be useful in misfortune.
   800. āveṉṟu pōṉa piṟaku aḷḷi iṭukiṟatu ār ?
   After his last gasp who will distribute our food ?
   801. āvēṟu niṟamāṉālum, pālvēṟu niṟamāmō?
   Will the colour of the skin of a cow affect that of its milk?
   802. āḻamaṟiyum ōṅkil mēḷam aṟiyum aravam.
   The onkil fish is acquainted with depth, and the snake knows the sound
   of a drum.
   This reference to the instincts of animals serves to indicate the
   aptitude &c., of individuals.
   803. āḻam aṟiyāmal kālai yiṭātē.
   Do not step down unless you know the depth.
   804. āḻākku arici mūḻākkuppāṉai mutaliyār varukiṟa vīṟāppaip pārum.
   With an àlak of rice in hand and a pot that will suffice to boil only
   three fourths of it look at the ostentation the Mudaliar displays.
   805. āḻiyellām vayalāṉāl eṉṉa avaṉi yellām aṉṉamayamāṉāl eṉṉa?
   What if the great deep were an extended field and all the world
   standing corn?
   Even then each could enjoy only what he might consume.
   806. āḷamāṭṭātavaṉukkup peṇṭēṉ ?
   Of what use is a wife to him who cannot govern her?
   807. āḷaṉillāt tukkam aḻutālum tīrātu.
   The grief occasioned by the death of a husband will not be removed by a
   flood of tears.
   808. āḷaṉ illātavaḷ āṟṟu maṇalukkuc cari.
   She who has no husband is like sand in the bed of a river.
   Uncertain as to position.
   809. āḷāṉa āṭkaḷukku aviḻ akappaṭāk kālattilē kākā picācu kañcikku
   aḻukiṟatu.
   The raven demon crying for kanji when the well-to-do cannot obtain a
   grain of boiled rice.
   810. āḷukku oru kuṭṭuk kuṭṭiṉālum avaṉukkup putti varātu.
   Although each of you may cuff the fellow, he will not thereby become
   wiser.
   811. āḷukku oru kuṭṭuk kuṭṭa aṭiyēṉ talai miṭāppōla.
   Being buffeted by every one, my head has become as large as a
   water-pot.
   812. āḷukkuḷḷē āḷāyiruppāṉ.
   He may escape recognition in a crowd.
   813. āḷai aṟintutāṉ aṟukkiṟāṉ.
   After ascertaining the character of the person he undermines his
   interests.
   814. āḷai āḷ aṟiyavēṇṭum mīṉaip puḷiyaṅkāy aṟiyavēṇṭum.
   Man must be tested by man and fish by tamarind acid.
   815. āḷai āḷ kuttum āḷ miṭukkup pattup pēraik kuttum.
   Personal valor enables one to encounter an enemy, but outward show will
   scare away ten.
   816. āḷaic cuṟṟippārāmal aḷakkiṟatā?
   What, do you take your measure of a person without eyeing him all
   around ?
   817. āḷaip pār mukattaip pār.
   Look at the person, look at his face.
   Spoken in derision of a boaster.
   818. āḷaip pārttu vāyāl ēyttāṉ.
   He eyed the man and deceived him by his talk.
   819. āḷ āḷaik kuttum, pakaṭam pattup pēraik kuttum.
   One man may stab one, threatening may stab ten.
   820. āḷ illāmal āyutam veṭṭumā?
   Will a sword cut unwielded ?
   821. āḷ irukkak kolai cāyumā ?
   Is he who is yet alive, murdered ?
   822. āḷ illāp paṭai ampalam.
   Mere weapons are ineffective.
   823. āḷ iḷantalai kaṇṭāl tōṇi mitakkap pāyum.
   When a dhony finds her steersman unskilful she pitches.
   Spoken of something going wrong from want of skill.
   824. āḷ ēṟa nīr ēṟum.
   As men embark, the surrounding water rises.
   825. āḷ koñcamākilum āyutam miṭukku.
   Though feeble in person, his weapon is powerful.
   826. āḷ mettak kūṭiṉāl mīṉ mettap piṭikkalām.
   When numerous fishermen combine together, multitudes of fish may be
   caught.
   827. āṟalla nūṟalla ākiṟatu ākaṭṭum.
   Neither six nor a hundred are required, let that be which will be.
   828. āṟām pēṟu peṇṇāyp piṟantāl āṟāṉa kuṭittaṉam nīṟākaviṭum.
   If the sixth-born be a female, a family of overflowing wealth will be
   reduced to powder.
   829. āṟilum cāvu nūṟilum cāvu.
   Death may occur at six, or at a hundred years of age.
   830. āṟiṉa kañci paḻaṅkañci.
   Cold kanji is old kanji.
   831. āṟiṉa puṇṇilum acaṭu niṟkum.
   There will be a scab even after the wound is healed.
   lnterrupted amity though restored will occasion suspicion.
   832. āṟiṉāl accilē vār āṟāviṭṭāl miṭāvilē vār.
   If cool pour it into the mould, if not pour it into the large earthen
   pot.
   833. āṟu kaṭakkumaḷavum aṇṇaṉ tampiyeṉal, āṟu kaṭantāl nīyā nāṉār.
   To avow fraternal relationship until the river is crossed; and to
   ignore it on arriving at the opposite bank.
   834. āṟu kaliyāṇam mūṉṟu peṇkaḷ mārōṭu mār taḷḷukiṟatu.
   Where six marriages are being celebrated three women are pressing and
   pushing.
   835. āṟu kātam eṉkiṟapōtē kōvaṇattai aviḻppāṉēṉ?
   Why loose your waist-cloth on mentioning that the river is yet ten
   miles off?
   836.āṟu keṭa nāṇal iṭu ūr keṭa nūlai iṭu.
   Plant reeds to destroy a river, to destroy a country introduce yarn.
   Weavers who neglect tillage, and foul the water by dying processes &c
   are here referred to.
   837. āṟu koṇṭatu pāti tūṟu koṇṭatu pāti.
   The river has destroyed one half and the jungle the other.
   838. āṟu niṟaiyac calam pōṉālum pāykiṟatu koñcam cāykiṟatu koñcam.
   Though the river is in full flood part of it flows on in its course,
   and part diverges.
   839. āṟu niṟaiyap pōṉālum nāykku nakkut taṇṇīr.
   Though the river is full to overflowing, a dog laps.
   Amid the greatest abundance one can only enjoy what is required
   840. āṟu nīntiṉa eṉakkuk kuḷam nīntuvatu aritō?
   Having swum a river, will it be difficult for me to swim over in tank?
   841. āṟu nīntiṉavaṉukku vāykkāl evvaḷavu?
   What is a mere channel to him who has swum a river ?
   842. āṟu nērāyp pōkātu.
   A river never flows straight.
   843. āṟu nērāṉa ūr nilai nillātu.
   A town in the course of a river will not endure.
   844. āṟu pārkkap pōka āyccikkup piṭittatu caluppu.
   The old dame caught a cold by going to look at the river.
   845. āṟu pōvatē pōkku aracaṉ colvatē tīrppu.
   The flow of a river is its course, the utterance of a ruler is his
   decision.
   846. āṟu mācap payaṇam añci naṭantāl muṭiyumā?
   Can a six months journey be accomplished if the party walk
   hesitatingly?
   An arduous enterprize requires unremitted exertion.
   847. āṟu mātam kāṭṭilē, āṟu mātam vīṭṭilē.
   Six months in the jungle and six at home.
   848. āṟu mātattukkuc caṉiyaṉ piṭittāṟpōla.
   As Saturn seized one for six months together.
   849. āṟum kaṭaṉ nūṟum kaṭaṉ perukkac cuṭeṭā paṇikārattai.
   Debt in debt whether it amounts to six or a hundred; you fool(?) bake
   the cakes large.
   850. āṟu vaṭivilēyum karipput teḷivilēyum varuttam.
   Their severity is most felt, when a flood subsides, and a famine
   terminates.
   851. āṟellām kaṇṇīr aṭi ellām ceṅkuruti.
   All the way is bedewed with tears, and the footprints are red with
   blood.
   852. āṟṟit tūṟṟi ampalattil vaikkap pārkkiṟāṉ.
   He aims to expose me, after comforting and abusing me.
   853. āṟṟilē pōkiṟa taṇṇīrai appā kuṭi , aiyā kuṭi.
   Drink sir, and drink the water that is flowing in the river.
   Spoken of apparent generosity which in reality costs nothing.
   854. āṟṟilē oru kālum cēṟṟilē oru kālumāy irukkiṟāṉ.
   He has one foot in the river and one in mud.
   Said of one involved in inextricable difficulty.
   855. āṟṟilē pōṭṭālum aḷantu pōṭa vēṇṭum.
   Although you are throwing it into the river, measure it first.
   856. āṟṟilē kaṇukkāl taṇṇīrilum añci naṭappatu uṇṭu.
   Though water in a river is up to one's ankle only, some will wade with
   hesitation.
   857. āṟṟilē ūrukiṟatu maṇalilē cuvaṟukiṟatu.
   Creeping along a river and sinking in the sand.
   858. āṟṟilē viṭṭa toppai pōl tavikkiṟēṉ.
   I am tossed about like a tuft of sacred grass that has been thrown into
   a river.
   859. āṟṟil karaitta puḷiyum aṅkāṭikkiṭṭa patarumāyiṟṟu.
   It is the pulp of the tamarind fruit dissolved in a river, and chaff
   sent to the bazaar.
   Said of things useless and unavailing.
   860. āṟṟiṟ peruveḷḷam nāykkeṉṉa caḷapput taṇṇīr.
   The river is in flood, but what of that to a dog? it is only a fordable
   stream.
   861. āṟṟukkup pārppāṉ tuṇaiyā, cōṟṟukkup payaṟṟaṅkāy kaṟiyā?
   Will a Brahman be of any use when one crosses a river, or pulse in pod
   serve for a curry?
   862. āṟṟukkum payam kāṟṟukkum payam.
   Both the river and weather are dreaded.
   863. āṟṟukkup pōṉatum illai ceruppuk kaḻaṟṟiṉatum illai.
   I neither went to the river, nor put off my shoes.
   864. āṟṟupperukkum aracum arai nāḻi.
   The flood of a river and the reign of a king last but half an hour.
   865. āṟṟu maṇalai aḷaviṭakkūṭātu.
   The sands of a river cannot be counted.
   866. āṟṟu nīrai nāy nakkik kuṭikkumō eṭuttuk kuṭikkumō?
   How does a dog drink the water of a river, by lapping or by lading?
   867. āṟṟaik kaṭantallō akkarai ēṟa vēṇṭum?
   Before ascending its opposite bank it is necessary first, is it not to
   cross the river?
   868. āṟṟaik kaṭantāl ōṭakkāraṉukku oru coṭṭu.
   After crossing the river the boatman gets a cuff.
   869. āṟṟaik kaṭattiviṭu ākācattiṟ paṟakkak kuḷikai tarukiṟēṉ
   eṉkiṟāṉ.
   He says, carry me over the river and I will give you a pill that
   willenable you to fly through the air.
   870. āṉatallāmal āvataṟivārō?
   Can one comprehend the future as well as the past?
   871. āṉa teyvattai āṟu koṇṭupōkiṟatu aṉumantarāyaṉukkut
   teppattiruviḻāvā?
   After the river has carried away every imaginable deity, do you stay to
   celebrate an aquatic festival in honour of Hanuman?
   Said of one seeking the lesser aid when the greater has failed.
   872. āṉamaṭṭum ātāḷiyaṭittuppōṭṭu, āntai pōl viḻikkiṟāṉ.
   Having spent all he stares like an owl.
   873. āṉa mutalai aḻittavaṉ māṉam iḻappatu aritalla.
   Having lost his capital, it will not be difficult for him to lose his
   reputation.
   874. āṉavaṉ ākātavaṉ ellāttilum uṇṭu.
   The good and the bad exist among all.
   875. āṉāl accilē vārkkiṟēṉ ākāviṭṭāl miṭāvilē vārkkiṟēṉ.
   If I succeed I will pour it into a mould, if not, into a large pot.
   Accommodating one's conduct to circumstances.
   876. āṉi aṭiyiṭātē kūṉi kuṭipōkātē.
   Do not begin to build in June; nor set out to occupy a house in March.
   877. āṉi arai āṟu, āvaṇi muḻu āṟu.
   In June half a river, in August a full river.
   878.āṉi āṉai vālotta karumpu.
   In June sugar-cane is like an elephant's tail.
   879. āṉai acaintu tiṉṉum vīṭu acaiyāmal tiṉṉum.
   An elephant moves when eating, a house eats without moving.
   880. āṉai ācāravācalaik kākkum, pūṉai puḻutta mīṉaik kākkum.
   An elephant waits before the outer hall of a king’scourt; a cat watches
   the putrid fish.
   881. āṉai āyiram peṟṟāl aṭiyum āyiram peṟumā?
   If an elephant fetch a thousand, will the mark of his footstep be worth
   so much?
   882. āṉai iruntu aracāṇṭa iṭattilē pūṉai iruntu pulampi aḻukiṟatu.
   A cat sits and mews in the place once occupied by the royal elephant.
   883. āṉai ilaikkaṟi pūṉai porikkaṟi.
   An ordinary curry for an elephant and a superior curry for a cat.
   884. āṉai uṇṭa viḷāṅkaṉi pōla.
   Like a blighted wood-apple swallowed by an elephant.
   885. āṉai ēṟiyum cantu vaḻi nuḻaivāṉēṉ?
   Why enter by a corner when mounted on an elephant ?
   886. āṉai ēṟit tiṭṭivāyil nuḻaivārā?
   Will one mounted on an elephant enter through a wicket?
   887. āṉai oru kuṭṭipōṭṭum palaṉ, paṉṟi pala kuṭṭi pōṭṭum payaṉ illai.
   It is of value though an elephant brings forth a single young one but
   the many young ones of a pig are of no value.
   One good thing is better than ten bad ones.
   888. āṉai kaṭṭat tūr vāṉamuṭṭap pōr.
   The stalks of the grain are so strong that an elephant may be tied to
   them, and the stacks are as high as the heavens.
   Said in exaggeration of an abundant harvest.
   889. āṉai kaṇṭa piṟavikkuruṭar aṭittukkoḷḷukiṟatu pōl.
   As the blind quarrelled about an elephant they had examined.
   890. āṉai kaṟuttiruntum āyiram poṉ peṟum.
   Though black, an elephant will fetch a thousand gold pieces.
   891. āṉai kāṇāmaṟpōṉāṟ kuṇṭuc caṭṭiyil tēṭiṉāl akappaṭumā ?
   If an elephant be lost, is it to be sought in an earthen pot ?
   892. āṉai kuṇṭuc caṭṭiyiṉum kuḻiciyiṉum uṇṭō ?
   Is the elephant in the rice-pot or in the Water-pot ?
   893. āṉai kēṭṭa vāyāl, āṭṭuk kuṭṭi kēṭkiṟatā ?
   What, does the mouth that asked for an elephant ask for a lamb ?
   894. āṉai koṭuttum aṅkucattiṟkup piṇakkā ?
   Having given the elephant is there a dispute about the goad ?
   895. āṉai koṭiṟṟil aṭakkukiṟatu pōla enta maṭṭum aṭakkukiṟatu ?
   How long shall I conceal it as an elephant incloses a thing in his jaws
   ?
   896. āṉaik kavaṭum pūṉait tiruṭum.
   The deceit of an elephant and the thievishness of a cat.
   897. āṉaikku aṟupatu muḻam aṟakkuḷḷaṉukku eḻupatu muḻam.
   Keep away from an elephant sixty cubits, and from a dwarf seventy
   cubits.
   898. āṉaikkum pāṉaikkum cari.
   The same reason is applicable alike to elephants and earthen pots.
   899.āṉaikkum pulikkum neruppaik kaṇṭāl payam.
   The elephant and tiger are afraid of fire.
   900. āṉaikkum aṭi caṟukkum.
   Even an elephant may slip.
   901. āṉaikkut tīṉiyiṭum vīṭṭil, āṭṭukkuṭṭikkup pañcamā?
   Will a lamb be famished in a place where elephants are fed ?
   902. āṉaik kūṭṭattiṟ ciṅkam pukuntatupōla.
   As if a lion had entered a herd of elephants.
   903. āṉaikkut tērai ūṇā?
   Are toads fit for elephant's food ?
   904. āṉaikkut tuṟaṭum aṉṉattukku miḷakāyum vēṇṭum.
   An elephant requires a goad, and boiled rice a chilli (condiment.)
   905. āṉaikku illai kāṉalum maḻaiyum.
   An elephant is not affected by sunshine or rain.
   906. āṉaikku oru kālam pūṉaikku oru kālam.
   The elephant has its time, the cat also has its time.
   907. āṉai cettālum āyiram poṉ.
   Although dead, an elephant will fetch a thousand gold pieces.
   908. āṉai taḻuviya kaiyālē āṭu taḻuvukiṟatō?
   What! does the hand that has caressed an elephant caress a sheep?
   909. āṉai taṉ talaiyil tāṉē maṇṇaip pōṭṭukkoḷḷum.
   The elephant will put sand on its own head.
   To see this done by wild elephants when travelling through a jungle is
   very interesting.
   910. āṉai taṉṉaik kaṭṭac caṅkiliyait tāṉē koṭuttatu pōla.
   As an elephant gives the chain to tether himself.
   Said of one who, whether consciously or not, supplies means to his own
   disadvantage.
   911. āṉai turattivantālum ālayattil nuḻaiyalākātu.
   Though chased by an elephant, it is not right to enter a temple.
   912. āṉai niḻalaip pārkkat tavaḷai kalaṅkiṉāṟpōlē.
   As a frog trembled at the shadow of an elephant.
   913. āṉai paṭuttāl āḷmaṭṭam.
   When an elephant lies down its height will equal the stature of a man.
   914. āṉai paṭuttāl āṭṭukkuṭṭikkut tāḻumā?
   When an elephant lies down, will he be lower than a lamb ?
   915. āṉai pārkka veḷḷeḻuttā?
   Are your eyes too dim to see an elephant ?
   You must be blind indeed.
   916. āṉai pōṉa vīti
   The street by which an elephant passed.
   917. āṉai mitikkap piḻaippārkaḷā?
   Has any survived after being trodden under foot by an elephant ?
   918. āṉai muṭṭat tāḷ vāṉamuṭṭap pōr.
   Stubble as high as an elephant, stacks towering to the skies.
   919. āṉai mēyum kāṭṭil āṭṭukkuṭṭi mēya iṭam illaiyā?
   Is there not room for a lamb to crop its food in a jungle where
   elephants feed?
   920. āṉai mēlē pōkiṟavaṉaic cuṇṇāmpu kēṭṭāṟpōla.
   Like asking chunam (lime) of one who is going along on an elephant.
   921. āṉaimēl iṭṭa pāram pūṉaimēl iṭṭāṟpōla.
   As if an elephant's load was transferred to a cat.
   922. āṉaiyum aṟukampulliṉāl taṭaipaṭum.
   Even an elephant may be impeded by arugu, Agrostis linearis, grass.
   This grass is sacred to Ganesa.
   923. āṉaiyum āṉaiyum muṭṭumpōtu iṭaiyil akappaṭṭa kocukupōla.
   As a gnat between two elephants that are brought into collision.
   924. āṉaiyai vittuvāṉukkum pūṉaiyaik kuṟavaṉukkum koṭu.
   Give an elephant to a pundit, and a cat to a mountaineer.
   925. āṉaiyaik koṉṟavaṉ pūṉaiyai vellamāṭṭāṉā?
   Is he who slew an elephant unable to overcome a cat ?
   926. āṉaiyai āyiram poṉṉukku vāṅki iruppu aṅkucattiṟku ēmāntu niṟpāṉēṉ?
   After having paid a thousand gold pieces for an elephant, why hesitate
   to buy an iron goad?
   927. āṉaiyaik kuttic cuḷakālē mūṭuvāḷ.
   She will stab the elephant and cover it with a sieve.
   928. āṉaiyaik kaṭṭic cuḷakālē maṟaippāḷ.
   Having tied the elephant she will cover it with a winnowing fan.
   929. āṉaiyaittēṭak kuṭattukkuḷ kai vaittatu pōla.
   Like putting one's hand into a water-pot in search of a missing
   elephant.
   930. āṉaiyai viṟṟut tuṟaṭṭikku maṉṟāṭukiṟāṉ.
   Having sold the elephant he begs for the goad.
   931. āṉaiyait taṇṇīril iḻukkiṟa mutalai, pūṉaiyait taraiyil iḻukkumā?
   Can an alligator which can draw an elephant in water, drag a cat on dry
   ground ?
   932. āṉai varum piṉṉē maṇi ōcai varum muṉṉē.
   The sound of the bell is heard before the elephant makes its
   appearance.
   Spoken of events which cast their shadows before.
   933. āṉai vāl piṭittuk karaiyēṟalām āṭṭukkuṭṭiyiṉ vāl piṭittuk
   karaiyēṟalāmā?
   One can cross a river by holding the tail of an elephant, can one do so
   by holding the tail of a sheep?
   934. āṉai viḻuntāl kompu, puli viḻuntāl tōl.
   On the death of an elephant the tusk remains, on the death of a tiger
   the skin.
   935. āṉai viḻuṅkiya ammaiyārukkup pūṉai cuṇṭāṅki.
   A cat will be a small thing to an old dame who swallowed an elephant.
   936. āṉai viḻuntāṟ kutirai maṭṭam.
   When down, an elephant is as high as a horse.
   937. āṉai vēkam aṭaṅkum tuṟaṭṭiyāl.
   The force of an elephant is subdued by the goad.
   938. ikaḻcciyuṭaiyōṉ pukaḻcciyaṭaiyāṉ.
   The contemptible will not be praised.
   939. ikkaraiyil pākalaip pōṭṭu akkaraiyil koḻukompu naṭukiṟāṉ.
   He puts down the seed pagal (a creeper) on this side of the river and
   erects a supporting pole on that.
   940. iṅku irunta pāṇṭam pōla.
   Like a vessel that contained assafoetida.
   941. iccitta kāriyam irakaciyam allavē.
   A thing that is greatly desired is not secret.
   942. iñci tiṉṟa kuraṅkupōla.
   Like a monkey that has eaten green ginger.
   943.iṭakkaṉukku vaḻi eṅkē? kiṭakkiṟavaṉ talaimēlē.
   Where is the way of the perverse ? on the head of the man that is lying
   down.
   944. iṭaṅkoṭuttāl maṭam piṭuṅkuvāṉ.
   If permitted he will pull down the choultry.
   Intimating what persons of violent tendencies must be at once
   repressed.
   945. iṭatukaikku valatukai tuṇai valatukaikku iṭatukai tuṇai.
   The right hand helps the left and the left the right.
   946. iṭam valam teriyātavaṉōṭu iṇakkam paṇṇakkūṭātu.
   One may not make friendship with him who does not know the right side
   from the left.
   Intimating that one must have nothing to do with fools.
   947. iṭi ōcai kēṭṭa pāmpu pōla.
   Like a snake that has heard thunder.
   948. iṭikkuk kuṭai piṭikkalāmā?
   Will an umbrella be of any use in a thunder-storm ?
   949. iṭukiṟa teyvam eṅkum iṭum.
   A liberal deity will give every-where.
   950. iṭuppu vaitta iṭamellām aṭuppu vaittāṉ.
   In every place on which he reclined he constructed a hearth.
   Spoken of one who takes care of himself.
   951. iṭuppu oṭinta kōḻikku uraṟ kuḻiyē kati.
   The mortar hole is the asylum of the fowl with a broken back.
   952.iṭumpu ceyvārkku irāp pakal nittirai illai.
   Oppressors sleepnot day or night
   953. iṭuvatu piccai peṟuvatu mōkṣam.
   Alms-giving secures heavenly bliss.
   954. iṭuvār piccaiyaik keṭuvār keṭuppār.
   The evil-disposed will destroy the good deeds of the beneficent.
   955.iṭuvāḷ iṭuvāḷeṉṟu ēkkaṟṟu iruntāḷām, nāḻi nelluk koṭuttu nālācaiyum
   tīrttāḷām.
   It is said that she waited patiently for her mistress assured she would
   be rewarded; and at length she got ameasure of rice, and her four
   desires were met.
   956. iṭaikkaṇakkaṉ cettāṉ, iṉip piḻaippāṉ nāṭṭāṉ.
   The curnam of the shepherd caste is dead, henceforth the peasant may
   prosper.
   957. iṭai cāynta kuṭam kiṭai.
   The water-pot remains aslant as when put down.
   958. iṭaitteruvil kōlam varumpōtu kucatteru eṅkē eṉkiṟāḷ?
   When the marriage procession comes along the shepherd's street she asks
   where the potter's street is.
   959. iṭaippiṟappum kaṭaippiṟappum ākātu.
   Middle and lower ranks in life are not good.
   960. iṭaip putti piṭariyilē.
   The sense of the shepherd is in his neck.
   961. iṭaiyaṉ keṭuttatu pāti maṭaiyaṉ keṭuttatu pāti.
   The shepherd destroyed half, and the simpleton destroyed half.
   962. iṭaiyaṉ kaliyāṇam viṭiyum poḻutu.
   A shepherd's marriage takes place at day-break.
   963. iṭaiyāṇṭiyum kucattātaṉum illai.
   Among shepherds there are no Saiva mendicants, among potters there are
   no Vaishnava mendicants.
   964. iṭaiyūṟu ceytōṉ maṉaiyil irukkalātu pēy mutalāy ?
   Even a demon will not haunt the dwelling of him, that defeats the hopes
   of another.
   965. iṭṭa eḻuttiṟku ēṟa ācaip paṭṭāl kiṭaikkumā?
   If one's desires are in excess of destiny, will they be obtained?
   966. iṭṭataṉ mēl ēṟācaippaṭukiṟatā?
   Is it fit to wish for more than what is already given?
   967. iṭṭavaṉ iṭāviṭṭāl veṭṭuppakai.
   If the giver cease to give, mortal hatred will ensue.
   968. iṭṭārkku iṭu, cettārkku aḻu.
   Give to those who have given, weep for the dead.
   969. iṭṭu vaittāl tiṉṉavum eṭuttu vaittāl cumakkavum teriyum.
   He knows how to eat if food be set before him, and he knows how to
   carry if the burden be laid upon him.
   970. iṇaṅkārōṭu iṇaṅkuvatu ikaḻcci.
   To associate with the obstinate will bring disgrace.
   971. itu eṉṉa veḷḷarikkāy viṟṟa paṭṭaṇamā ?
   What! is this a town in which water-melons were sold ?
   972. ittaṉai periyavaṉ kaiyaip piṭittāl eppaṭi māṭṭōm eṉkiṟatu ?
   When so great a personage takes one by the hand, how can one say nay ?
   973. ittaṉai attaṉai āṉāl attaṉai ettaṉai ākum?
   If this amounts to that how much will that come to ?
   974. inta aṭikku enta nāyum cākum.
   Such a blow would kill any dog.
   975. inta elumpaik kaṭippāṉēṉ contappallup pōvāṉēṉ?
   Why gnaw this bone, and why lose one's own teeth?
   976. intak kūḻukkō ittaṉai tirunāmam?
   Is it for this gruel that so many sacred namams are used?
   977. intak kūḻukkā irupatteṭṭu nāmam ?
   What, is it for this gruel that I have made twenty-eight námam
   sectarial marks.
   978. intakkarippiṟ cettāl, iṉṉam oru karippu mayiraip piṭuṅkumā?
   If one die during this famine will another famine pull off his hair?
   979. intap pūṉaiyum pāl kuṭikkumā eṉṟāṟpōl irukkiṟāṉ?
   He is as if one said of a cat, will this also drink milk?
   980. intap perumaiyum pantal aḻakum pārttaiyā paṇṇaikkārā ?
   O, headman, hast thou noticed this greatness, and the beauty of the
   Pandal?
   981. inta nāyai ēṉ ippaṭic ceykiṟāy?
   Why do you treat this dog in this way?
   982. intiraṉaic cantiraṉai ilaiyālē maṟaippāḷ, ematarumarājaṉaik
   kaiyālē maṟaippāḷ.
   She will conceal Jupiter and the moon with a leaf, and Yama, the regent
   of the dead, with her hand,
   983. imaik kuṟṟam kaṇṇukkut teriyātu.
   The defects in the eye-lashes are not apparent to the eye.
   984. iyamaṉ oruvaṉaik kolvāṉ, ēṟṟam mūvaraik kollum.
   Yama the regent of the dead, kills one at a time, a picotta may kill
   three at once.
   985. iyaṟkai vācaṉaiyō ceyaṟkai vācaṉaiyō?
   Is the habit natural or acquired?
   986. irakkam illātāṉ neñcam irumpilum kaṭitu.
   The heart of one void of compassion is harder than iron.
   987. irakkap pōṉālum ciṟakkap pōkavēṇṭum.
   Though yougobegging, go decently attired.
   988. iraṅkātavar uṇṭā ? peṇ eṉṟāl pēyum iraṅkum.
   Are there those who have no pity ? If the word woman be uttered even a
   demon will be moved with compassion.
   989. iraṇṭu āṭṭilē ūṭṭa viṭṭa kuṭṭipōla.
   Likea lamb allowed to suck two sheep.
   Spoken of a youth full of strength and activity.
   990. iraṇṭu paṭṭa ūril kuraṅkum kuṭi irātu.
   Even a monkey will not stay in a village divided against itself.
   991. iraṇṭu tōṇiyil kāl vaikkiṟatā ?
   Is it to plant your feet on two dhonies?
   992. iraṇṭu peṇṭāṭṭikkāraṉ vīṭṭil neruppēṉ?
   Why fire in the house of a man that has two wives?
   993. iraṇṭu vīṭṭilum kaliyāṇam iṭaiyilē cettatām nāykkuṭṭi.
   It is said that the pup died between two houses where marriage
   festivities were going on.
   994. iraṇṭu nāykku oru elumpu pōṭṭatu pōla.
   As a bone thrown to two dogs.
   995. irantum parattukku iṭu.
   Though you have to beg them, make your offerings to God.
   996.irantōrkku īvatu uṭaiyār kaṭaṉ.
   It is the duty of the richto give alms to beggars.
   997.irappavaṉukku veṇcōṟu pañcamā?
   Is it difficult for a beggar to get fine rice?
   998. irappavaṉukku eṅkum pañcam illai.
   A beggarnowhere suffers from famine.
   999. iraval uṭaimai icaivāy irukkiṟatu, eṉ piḷḷai āṇai nāṉ
   koṭukkamāṭṭēṉ.
   The thing borrowed suits; I swear by my child that I will not return
   it.
   1000. iraval catamā , tiruṭaṉ uṟavā?
   Is a thing borrowed a durable possession, is a thief a friend?
   1001. iravaṟ cōṟu pañcam tāṅkumā?
   Will borrowed rice prove a security against famine?
   1002. iravaṟ cīlaiyai nampi iṭuppuk kantaiyai eṟintāḷām.
   It is said, that relying on a borrowed cloth, she throw away her
   tattered cloth.
   1003. irāku ticaiyil vāḻntavaṉum illai, rāja ticaiyiṟ keṭṭavaṉum illai.
   None ever prospered under Rahu, nor was any one ever ruined under
   Jupiter.
   Rahuis the name of a monstrous serpent ordragon, the ascendingnode, and
   regarded as one of the nine planets, whichwith Kethu the descending
   node, is said to grasp the sun and moon periodically, and thus to cause
   eclipses. When the supernals assembled at a feast to drink the water of
   immortality obtained from the churning of the milky ocean Rahu and
   Kethu, two Asuras, clandestinely got admission. The sun and moon saw
   them and at once informed Vishnu of their presence. Vishnu dispatched
   his marvellous disc and decapitated them just as the coveted nectar was
   about to enter their throats. They to avenge themselves resolved
   periodically to swallow the sun and moon.
   1004. irāk kaṇṭa caṉi miṭāppōla vīṅkiṉa katai.
   The story of one who in a dream of the night saw Saturn swelling as a
   large pot.
   1005. irācaṉ ēṟiya kutiraiyaippōl.
   Like a horse ridden by a king.
   1006.irācamukattukku elumiccam paḻam pōla.
   As a lemon offered to a king.
   A gift to procure his favour: a hindu when offering a lemon or fruit of
   any kind invariably does so with the right hand.
   1007. irāca kīriyaik kāvukiṟatupōla.
   Like carrying a royal mongoose.
   1008. irācaṉ āṉālum taṉ tāykku makaṉē.
   Though a king, he is the son of his mother.
   1009. irācaṉ ceṅkōl taṉ nāṭuvaraiyil.
   A king's sceptre extends to the limit of his territory.
   1010. irācā makaḷ āṉālum koṇṭavaṉukkup peṇṭutāṉ.
   Though a princess, she is the wife of the man who has taken her in
   marriage.
   1011. irācāḷiyaik kaṇṭa kokkuppōla.
   Like a heron which saw a falcon.
   1012. irācā kaṭaṉpaṭap puḷukkai kāṭittaṇṇīr kuṭittatupōla.
   As a slave lived on gruel because the king was in debt.
   1013. irāppaṭṭiṉi kiṭantavaṉ uritta vāḻaippaḻam viṟkiṟatā eṉṟu
   vicārittāṉām.
   It is said that he who starved the whole night inquired if peeled
   plantains could be obtained.
   1014. irāppaṭṭiṉi kiṭappavaṉ akavilai kēṭpāṉō?
   Does be who lies down at night fasting, enquire after the price of
   grain?
   1015. irāppaṭṭiṉi pāyōṭē.
   The sense of hunger ends on the mat.
   1016. irāppakal kaṇṇilē.
   In the eye night and day.
   1017. irāmar irunta iṭam ayōtti.
   Ayodhya was the city of Rama.
   1018. irāmaṉ maṅkaiyōṭu iṇaṅkiyatu avam.
   Acquiescence with the wishes of his wife was fatal to Rama.
   1019. irāmaṉaippōla rājā iruntāl aṉumāṉaip pōlac cēvakaṉum iruppāṉ.
   If the king be equal to Rama, his servant may be equal to Hanuman.
   Hanuman was the monkey chief, ally of Rama in his expedition against
   Lanka.
   1020. irā muḻutum rāmāyaṇam kēṭṭuc cītaikku rāmaṉ eṉṉa eṉṟa katai.
   The story of one who having listened to the reading of the Ramayana a
   whole night, asked what relationship existed between Sita and Rama.
   1021. irāmēcurattukkup pōyum caṉīcuraṉ tolaiyavillai.
   Though he went on a pilgrimage to Rameswaram, Saturn has not
   left him.
   1022. irāvaṇaṉ kuṭikku makōtaraṉ pōlum, cuyōtaṉaṉ kuṭikkuc cakuṉipōlum.
   He is what Mahodharan was, to the family of Ravana and what
   Sakuni was to Suyodhana.
   Said of one who under professions of friendship secretly plotsone's
   ruin.
   1023. irāvaṇa canniyācipōl irukkiṟāṉ.
   He is as Ravana in the guise of a hermit.
   1024. irāvuttaṉait taḷḷiṉatum allāmal kuḻiyum paṟittatām kutirai.
   It is said that the horse not only threw his rider, but dug his
   gravealso.
   1025. irukkiṟa aṉṟaikku erumaimāṭu tiṉṟāṟpōla.
   Like a buffalo he consumes the day's supply.
   1026. irukkiṟavaṉ cevvaiyāy iruntāl ciraikkiṟavaṉ cevvaiyāyc ciraippāṉ.
   If he who is being shaved sits properly, the barber will shave well.
   1027. irukka vēṇṭum eṉṟāl irumpait tiṉ.
   If you wish to live long, eat iron.
   1028. irukka irukka ellām icaivākum.
   In time all will be in harmony.
   1029. irukkum iṭam ēvumā ?
   Will the place on which we sit, incite ?
   1030. iruci uṭaimai irāttaṅkal ākātu.
   Oblations made to a demoness must not be kept till the morning.
   1031. iru cuḻi, iruntu uṇṭālum uṇṇum, irantu uṇṭālum uṇṇum.
   He who has a double twirl of hair, may live either on his own resources
   or by begging.
   1032. iruṭṭu vēlaiyō kuruṭṭu vēlaiyō?
   Was the work done in the dark or by the blind ?
   1033. iruṭṭu vīṭṭukkuḷ pōṉāl tiruṭṭukkai niṟkumā?
   Will his thievish hand be restrained when he enters a dark room?
   1034. iruṭṭuk kuṭivāḻkkait tiruṭṭukku aṭaiyāḷam.
   It is a sign of thievishness for a family to live in obscurity.
   1035. irutalai maṇiyaṉ pāmpaippōla.
   Like a snake that has a head at both ends.
   1036. irutalaikkoḷḷi eṟumpu pōl āṉēṉ.
   I have become like an apt on a fire-brand lighted at both ends.
   Spoken when in danger from opposite quarters.
   1037. iruntallō paṭukkavēṇṭum?
   Must one not sit before lying down?
   1038. irunta nāḷ ellām iruntuviṭṭu ūrppaṟaiyaṉukkut tāraivārtta katai.
   The story of one who after leading an unexceptionable course of life
   gave his daughter in marriage to the village Pariah.
   1039. iruntavaṉ talaimēlē iṭi viḻuntatu pōla.
   As the thunder-bolt fell on the head of the one who remained.
   1040. irunta kāl mūtēvi naṭanta kāl cītēvi.
   The sluggish foot is Mudevi the goddess of adversity, the active footis
   Shridevi the goddess of prosperity.
   These two personages were produced when the milky ocean was churned to
   obtain ambrosia. They play an important part in the economy of the
   Hindus.
   1041. iruntavaṉukkup pōṉavaṉ kuṇam.
   He that went away was better than he who stayed.
   1042. iruntavaṉ eḻuntirukkiṟataṟkuḷḷē niṉṟavaṉ oru kātam pōvāṉ.
   Whilst he who was seated was rising, the man who was standing had gone
   ten miles.
   1043. iruntāl pūṉai, pāyntāl puli.
   While squatting, a cat, when springing, a tiger.
   1044. iruntāl iruppīr, eḻuntiruntāl niṟpīr.
   If sitting you sit, if you rise you stand.
   1045. iruntu paṇam koṭuttu naṭantu vāṅkavēṇṭiyatāy irukkiṟatu.
   One must walk a long way to get back the money lent when seated.
   1046. irupattoru maḻaiyum eṇṇi ūṟṟiyatu.
   The twenty-one kinds of rain were enumerated and poured out.
   1047. iruppuk katavu iṭittut taviṭṭuk koḻukkaṭṭai eṭukkiṟatā?
   What! knocking down an iron door to obtain a bran cake?
   1048. iruppuc calākaiyai viḻuṅkippōṭṭu iñciccāṟu kuṭittāl tīrumā?
   If one has swallowed a bar of iron, will its effects be removed by
   drinking a decoction of ginger?
   1049. iruppuk kōṭṭaiyum kaṟkatavum pōla.
   Like an iron fort and a stone door.
   1050. iru maṉatu maṅkaiyōṭu iṇaṅkuvatu avam.
   To associate with a double minded woman is fatal.
   1051. irumpu cempāṉāl turumpum tūṇām.
   If iron becomes copper, a straw may become a pillar.
   One impossibility is as like as another.
   1052. irumputtūṇaic cel arikkumā?
   Can white-ants eat an iron pillar ?
   1053. irumpu cempāṉāl tirumpip poṉ ākum.
   If iron can be converted into copper, Copper may be reconverted into
   gold.
   1054. irumpukkaṭṭiyaik kāṟṟaṭikkiṟapōtu ilavam pañcu eṉakku eṉṉa putti
   eṉkiṟatām.
   It is said that when the wind was driving along a piece of iron, the
   silk-cotton asked what was best for him to do.
   1055. irumpukkaṭṭi paṟakkiṟapōtu ilavampañcukku iruppiṭameṅkē ?
   When a piece of iron is flying away, where will silk-cotton find a
   resting place ?
   1056. irumpu aṭikkiṟa iṭattil nāykku eṉṉa vēlai?
   What has a dog to do in a smith's shop?
   1057. irumpu piṭitta kaiyum ciraṅku piṭitta kaiyum cummā irātu.
   The hand that has taken up an iron tool and the hand affected by the
   itch will not be still.
   1058. irumpu aṭikkiṟa iṭattil nāykku eṉṉa kiṭaikkum?
   What will a dog get in a smith's shop?
   1059. irumputtūṇai eṟumpu arittāṟpōla.
   As if an ant had gnawed an iron pillar.
   1060. irumpu tuṟaṭṭukku acaiyāta puḷiyaṅkāy tiruppāṭṭukku acaiyumā?
   Will the tamarind fruit that has resisted an iron hook shake at a
   sacred song.
   In illustration of this proverb the following may not be considered
   irrelevant. In the year 1826 when I went to my first Missionary
   station, Trincomalee on the Eastern coast of Ceylon, I called on the
   chief Mudaliar to pay my respects and to urge the claims of
   Christianity. The old gentleman who remembered the coercive system
   adopted by the Dutch for the propagation of Christianity, and well
   knowing too that Missionaries under the wild sway of Great Britain can
   use no weapon but the Gospel, uttered with great animation the above
   proverb. In view of the youthful character of his visitor he seemed to
   feel like Goliath in the presence of David.
   1061. irumpai eṟumpu arikkumā ?
   Can an ant gnaw iron ?
   1062. irumpai eli tiṉṉumā?
   Can a rat eat iron ?
   1063.irumpai eli kavviṟṟu eṉkiṟāṉ paṭukkāḷi.
   The infamous liar says that the rat took the iron in its mouth.
   1064. irumpaik kaṟaiyāṉ arittāl piḷḷaiyaip paruntu koṇṭu pōkātā?
   If the white-ants can eat iron, why cannot a hawk carry off a child ?
   1065. iruvarum ottāl iṇakkuvār ēṉ?
   If the two agree what need of arbitrators?
   1065. iruvarālē ākāta kāriyam oruvarālē ākumā?
   Can an affair be effected by one that could not be accomplished by two?
   1067. iruvar naṭpukku oruvar poṟumai.
   The friendship of two depends on the forbearance of one.
   1068. iruḷaṉ piḷḷaikku elikkuñcu pañcamā?
   Does the son of an Irulan, a wild tribe, suffer from a scarcity of
   young rats?
   1069. iruḷaṉ rājaviḻi viḻippāṉā?
   Can a savage put on the look of a king ?
   1070. iruḷum oru kālam nilavum oru kālam.
   A time of darkness, a time of moonshine.
   1071. ireṭṭiyārē ireṭṭiyārē eṉṟāl, kalappaiyait tiṭṭeṉṟu pōṭṭa katai.
   The story of one who dropped his plough when accosted O Reddy, O Reddy.
   1072. ilakkaṇam kaṟṟavaṉ kalakkam aṟa maṉṉar capai kāṇpāṉ.
   The learned will appear undismayed in a royal assembly.
   1073. ilakṣaṇam avalakṣaṇam mukattilē.
   Beauty and ugliness are in the face.
   1074. ilaṅkaṇam parama oḷaṣatam.
   Abstinence is the best medicine.
   1075. ilaṅkaiyil piṟantavaṉ ellām irāvaṇaṉ āvāṉā?
   Are all that are born in Ceylon, Ravanas?
   1076. ilaṅkaiyaic cuṭṭa kuraṅku.
   The monkey that set fire to Lanka.
   1077. ilavu kātta kiḷi āṉēṉ.
   I am like the parrot that waited for the silk-cotton pod.
   Spoken of one who has been sadly disappointed in his expectations.
   The proverb is said to refer to a parrot that on seeing a green pod on
   a silk-cotton tree believed it would ripen into fruit, whereas it
   eventually burst and the cotton was scattered to the winds.
   1078. iluppaippūvait tiruppiṉāl irupuṟamum pottal.
   If the flower of ilupai (Bassia Longifolia) be turned, it will be found
   hollow on both sides.
   1079. ilai tiṉṉi kāy aṟiyāṉ.
   He who feeds on leaves knows not the flavor of fruit.
   1080. ilaiyum paḻuppum eṅkum uṇṭu.
   Leaves green and sear are found every where.
   1081. ilaukīkam vaitīkam iraṇṭum vēṇṭum.
   The secular and the sacred are both necessary.
   1082. illatu vārātu uḷḷatu pōkātu.
   That which is not will not come, that which is, will not go.
   1083. illaṟam peritu tuṟavaṟam ciṟitu.
   Domestic life is better than that of the ascetic.
   1084. illaṟam peritu tuṟavaṟam paḻippu.
   Domestic life is honourable, that of the ascetic is disgraceful.
   1085. illātavaṉ pollātavaṉ.
   He that is destitute is wicked.
   1086. illātatu piṟavātu aḷḷātatu kuṟaiyātu.
   That which is not, will not come out; that from which nothing is taken;
   will not lessen.
   1087.illātu colli allaṟ paṭutal.
   Uttering a falsehood and suffering the evil thereof.
   1088. illāḷai viṭṭu vallāṇmai pēcukiṟatā?
   What! is it to speak manfully after deserting thy wife?
   1089. illātum illaṉ iruppatum illaṉ.
   He lacks nothing, nor does he possess any thing.
   1090. illātavaṉ peṇcāti ellārukkum tōḻiyā?
   Is the wife of the destitute the friend or companion of all ?
   1091. illai eṉṟa vīṭṭil palliyum cērātu.
   Even a lizard will not enter a house occupied by the niggardly.
   1092. illōr irappatu iyalpu.
   It is natural for the destitute to beg.
   1093. ivaḷ vilai mōril veṇṇey eṭuttut talaimakaṉukkuk kaliyāṇam
   paṇṇuvāḷ.
   She will make butter out of the butter milk-given for sale, and make
   provision for the marriage of her first-born son.
   1094. ivaṉukkum avaṉukkum ēḻām poruttam.
   There are seven points of agreement between this person and that.
   1095. ivaṉukkuc collum putti kaṭaliṟ peruṅkāyam karaittatu pōl
   irukkiṟatu.
   The advice given to him is like assafoetida dissolved in the sea.
   1096. ivaṉ ūrārukkup piḷḷai.
   He is the child of the whole village.
   Said of a self-willed wandering youth.
   1097. ivaṉ makā periya kaḷḷaṉ, kālālē muṭintataik kaiyālē aviḻkkiṟatu
   aritu.
   He is a clever rogue, what he ties with his feet it is difficult to
   untie with the hand.
   1098. ivaṉ kallātu kaṟṟavaṉ, uḷḷaṅkaiyil vaikuṇṭam kāṭṭuvāṉ.
   He has attained the unattainable; he can show Vaikundam Paradise in the
   palm of his hand.
   1099. ivaṉ putti ulakkaik koḻuntu.
   His wit is as sharp as a wooden pestle.
   1100. iḻavukku vantavaḷ tāli aṟuppāḷā?
   Will she who attends a funeral remove her marriage symbol?
   1101. iḻukkuṭaiya pāṭṭiṟku icai naṉṟu.
   Harmony sets off a faulty stanza.
   1102. iḻuvai kaṇṭāl aṭi pārppāṉēṉ?
   When the trail marks are before you, why look for footprints ?
   1103. iḻai āyiram poṉ peṟṟa intiravarṇappaṭṭu.
   A scarlet cloth each thread of which is worth a thousand gold pieces.
   1104. iḻaiyat tīṭṭik kuḻaiya vaṭittal.
   Thoroughly pounded and properly boiled.
   1105. iḷakiṉa irumpaik kaṇṭāṟ kollaṉ kuṇṭiyait tūkki aṭippāṉ.
   When the smith perceives that the iron is soft, he will raise himself
   to the stroke.
   The Indian smith squats at the forge, and rises to his feet only when
   he uses a two-handed hammer.
   1106. iḷaṅkaṉṟu payam aṟiyumā?
   Does a young calf know fear?
   1107. iḷamaiyiṟ cōmpal mutumaiyiṉ miṭimai.
   Indolence, in youth will bring poverty in old age.
   1108. iḷamaiyil muyaṟci mutumaiyiṟ kākkum.
   Industry in youth will support one in old age.
   1109. iḷamaiyiṟ paḻakkam eppōtum maṟavātu.
   The habits of early life will never be forgotten.
   1110. iḷamaiyum mutumaiyum cariyāṉa vayatalla.
   Youth and senility do not properly belong to a man's age.
   1111. iḷaveyil kāyāta nīyā tī pāyappōkiṟāy?
   Do you who cannot endure the early beams of the sun presume to walk
   over fire?
   1112. iḷaiñaṉ āṉālum ākavāṉ mūppu.
   Although young he will play the man.
   1113. iḷaittavaḷ talaiyil īrum pēṉum.
   In the tresses of a poor woman are found nits and lice.
   1114. iḷaittavaṉ ciṉēkitaṉaic cēr.
   Associate with the friend of the poor.
   1115. iḷaittavaṉē eḷḷai vitai.
   O you weak fellow, sow the sessamum seed.
   1116. iḷaiyāḷ ilai tiṉṉi mūttāḷ kāyaṟivāḷ.
   The younger sister feeds on leaves, the elder is accustomed to fruit.
   1117. iḷaiyāḷē vāṭi malaiyāḷam pōvōm, mūttāḷē vāṭi muṭṭikkoṇṭu cāvōm.
   Come my younger sister, we will proceed to Malayalam; come my elder
   sister, we will strike our heads together and die.
   1118. iṟaku muṟṟip paṟavai āṉāl, ellām taṉ vayiṟṟait tāṉ pārkkum.
   When mature and on the wing, all birds will look after their own food.
   1119. iṟakkum kālam vantāl piṟakkum īcalukkuc ciṟaku.
   When death approaches, white-ants take wing.
   1120. iṟakkum kālam varāmal piṟakkumā īcalukkuc ciṟaku?
   Will white-ants take wing except on the approach of death?
   1121. iṟaṅkum tuṟaiyilē nīttāṉāl, inta āṟṟai eppaṭik kaṭakkiṟatu?
   If on stepping into the riverone is obliged to swim, how will I get
   across ?
   1122. iṟaṅku poḻutilē maruntu kuṭi.
   Take medicine at sun-set.
   1123. iṟantavaṉ iruppavaṉukku vaḻikāṭṭi.
   The dead is the pilotof the living.
   1124. iṟantavaṉ piḷḷai iruntavaṉ aṭaikkalam.
   The child of the dead is the ward of the living.
   1125. iṟantavaṉukku eḷḷum taṇṇīrum.
   Sessamum and water offered to the dead.
   1126. iṟutta kuṭikku aṉarttam illai.
   A family out of debt is out of danger.
   1127. iṟuppāṉukkup paṇamum kiṭaiyātu, uḻaippāṉukkup peṇṇum kiṭaiyātu.
   He who pays his debts cannot obtain money, nor can the labourer obtain
   a wife.
   1128. iṟaicci tiṉkiṟavar kaṭuppukku maruntu aṟivār.
   They who live on flesh are acquainted with the medicine for tooth ache.
   1129. iṟaicci tiṉṟālum elumpaik kōttup pōṭṭukkoḷḷalāmā?
   Is one to wear a neck-lace of bones because he eats flesh ?
   This and the preceding proverb are somewhat singular but not unnatural
   among a vegetarian people.
   1130. iṟaitta kiṇaṟu ūṟum, iṟaiyāta kiṇaṟu nāṟum.
   The water of a well always drawn, is fresh, that of a well not drawn is
   fetid.
   1131. iṟaitta kiṇaṟu curakkum.
   The water of a well always drawn springs up a-fresh.
   1132.iṉam pirinta māṉ pōla.
   Like a deer separated from its herd.
   1133. iṉimēl oru teyvattaik kaiyeṭukkiṟatā?
   Hereafter is it to lift up the hands to a god?
   1134. iṉimēl emalōkapariyantam cātikkalām.
   Hereafter he may effect his purpose as far as the realms of Yama.
   1135. iṉpamum tuṉpamum poṟumaiyilē.
   Joy and grief must be regulated by moderation.
   1136. iṉpattil ācai evarkkum uṇṭu.
   Happiness is desired by all.
   1137. iṉpamum tuṉpamum eṭutta uṭalukku.
   The body it is that is affected by pleasure and pain.
   1138. iṉṟu iruppār nāḷaikku illai.
   Those who are alive to-day may not be on the morrow.
   1139. iṉṟaikku ilai aṟuttavaṉ nāḷaikkuk kulai aṟuppāṉ.
   He who cut off the leaves to-day may possibly cut off the bunch
   tomorrow.
   1140. iṉṟaikku ākiṟatu nāḷaikku ākaṭṭum.
   That which is practicable to-day may be so on the morrow.
   1141. iṉṟaikkuc cettāl nāḷaikku iraṇṭu nāḷ.
   If one die to-day, to-morrow will be the second day.
   1142. iṉṟai eṉpatum nāḷai eṉpatum illai eṉpataṟku aṭaiyāḷam.
   To say today; tomorrow, indicates refusal.
   1143. ī kalaiyāmal tēṉ eṭuppārkaḷ, eṭukkāmaṟ piṭippārkaḷ.
   They will take the honey without dispersing the bees, they will take it
   without raising it up.
   1144. īkai uṭaiyavaṉ ekkaḷippu aṭaivāṉ.
   The liberal giver will be happy.
   1145. īkku viṭam talaiyil, tēḷukkuk koṭukkil.
   In a fly, the head is the seat of poison, in a scorpion, the tail.
   1146. īcalukku ellām pakai.
   All are against the winged white-ants.
   1147. īcal iṟaku ellāvaṟṟilum mirutu.
   The wing of a white-ant is the softest of all things.
   1148. īcal maṭintāṟpōl māṇṭatē cēṉai.
   The army perished like winged white-ants.
   1149. īcaṟ perumpōkkil tavaḷai tatti viḻuṅkukiṟatu.
   The frog leaps and swallows the swarming winged white-ants.
   1150. īcaṉukku oppu iṅku oṉṟum illai.
   Nothing here is equal to God.
   1151. īccaṅkaḷ etilum kuḷircci .
   Date-palm toddy is the coolest of beverages.
   1152. īccam kāṭṭil erumai kuṭiyirunta katai.
   The story of a buffalo that lived in a date-palm grove.
   1153. īṭaṉ pāṭañcāṉ kūḻaiyerutu nuḷampañcātu.
   A strong man fears not hardship, nor does a bullock with a stunted tail
   fear gnats.
   1154. īṭākātavaṉai etirākkātē.
   Do not oppose your inferior.
   1155. īṭuḷḷa kuṭikkuk kēṭu illai.
   A wealthy family is not exposed to danger.
   1156. īṭṭiya poruḷiṉum eḻuttē uṭaimai.
   Learning is more substantial than accumulated riches.
   1157. īṭṭi eṭṭiyamaṭṭum kuttum, paṇam patiṉkātamum kuttum.
   A spear wounds as far as it reaches; the effect of money reaches ten
   kathams
   (100 miles).
   1158. īṭṭukku īṭum cōṭṭukkuc cōṭumāy iruntāl vāci.
   Like for like, and equality in a pair are desirable.
   1159. īṭṭukkum pāṭṭukkum iruntāḷ iṭukumari.
   The maiden who was given in marriage was equal to all theexigencies of
   life.
   1160. īntu pārttāl immi veḷi ākum.
   The smallest fraction will come out by division, immi = 1,075,200th
   part of a unit.
   1161. īppiciṉi irappatukūṭak kakkicam.
   A miser will find even begging difficult.
   1162. īyattaik kāyccalām irumpaik kāyccalāmā ?
   Load may be melted, can iron ?
   1163. īyam piṭittavaṉ etu colliṉum kēḷāṉ.
   He who has taken up lead will not listen, no matter what is it to him.
   1164. īyāta pullaṉai evviṭattilum kāṇōm.
   A niggardly, savage is nowhere found.
   1165. īyār tēṭṭait tīyār koḷvār.
   The wicked obtain by rapacity what the miserly accumulate.
   1166. īyār poruḷukkut tīyār.
   Thewicked enjoy the property of the miser.
   1167. īyum eṟumpum eṅkum uṇṭu.
   Flies and ants abound everywhere.
   1168. īyaip piṭittāl kai vēṟu kāl vēṟu.
   If you catch a fly, its limbs will be separated.
   1169. īyaip pōlē cuttamum eṟumpaippōlē palamum.
   Clean as a fly, andstrong as an ant.
   1170. īraccīlaiyaip pōṭṭuk kaḻuttu aṟuppāṉ.
   He will cut the throat after tying a wet cloth round it.
   1171. īra nāviṟku elumpu illai.
   There is no bone ina slanderous tongue.
   1172. īram aṟṟa iṭattilē ī moykkumā, īram uḷḷa iṭatitlē ī moykkumā? Do
   insects swarm in a dry place or in a wet place ?
   1173. īraveṅkāyattiṟku irupatteṭṭup purai.
   In an onion there are twenty-eight coats.
   1174. īrai niṉaippāṉ pērai maṟakkāṉ.
   He who thinks of a nit will not forget its name.
   1175. īraip pēṉākkip pēṉaip perumāḷ ākkiṉēṉ.
   I magnified the nit into a louse, and the louse into Perumal.
   1176. īr uruvap pēṉ akappaṭumā?
   Will lice be obtained when drawing nits between the finger and the
   thumb?
   1177. ī viṣṭittatum nāy tiruṭit tiṉṟatum.
   That which a bee ejects and that which a dog has stolen
   1178. ī viḻunta cātam eṭuttāloḻiyap pōmā ?
   Will a fly that has fallen into the boiled rice.go unless it be taken
   out?
   1179. īvōṉukku oru pōcaṉam, irappōṉukku ērāḷam.
   To the giver a meal, to the beggar plenty.
   1180. īḻattiṟ cekkāṭa iṅkē patam pārkka.
   The pressis turned in Lanka, and the material under pressure is
   examined here.
   1181. īṉavum teriyātu nakkavum teriyātu.
   It knows not how to bring forth nor how to lick.
   1182. īṉṟavaḷ tāy pāṭṭi, ivaḷ tāyiṉ tāy pīṭṭi.
   The mother of one's mother is his grandmother, her mother is his great
   grand mother.
   1183.īṉṟōr nañciṟ cāṉṟōr illai.
   Indulgence in the parent is not good for the child.
   1184. ukamuṭiya maḻai peytālum ōṭṭāṅkiḷiñcil payir ākumā?
   Though it should rain to the end of the world, would broken oyster
   shells vegetate?
   1185. ukirccuṟṟiṉ mēl ammi viḻuntatu pōl.
   As a grind-stone fell on the whitlow.
   1186. uṅkaḷ uṟavilē vēkiṟataippārkkilum oru kaṭṭu viṟakilē vēkiṟatu
   nallatu.
   It is better to be consumed by a faggot than by your friendship.
   1187. uṅkaḷ peṇṭukaḷ koṇṭal aṭittāl kaṇkaḷ koḷḷātu.
   The eyes will be over-powered by the dancing of your women.
   1188. uṅkaḷaik kaṭalilē kaikaḻuviṉēṉ.
   I have washed my hands of you in the sea.
   1189. ucu piṭi eṉṟāl nī piṭi eṉkiṟatām nāy.
   It is said that when he urged his dog to seize, it replied, you do so.
   1190. uccantalaiyiṟ ceruppāl aṭittālum ucci kuḷirumā?
   If slippered on the head, will the crown of the head become cool?
   1191. uṭampu ellām puḻuttavaṉ ammaṉ kōvilaik keṭutta katai.
   The story of a man who defiled Amman covil by his ulcerated body.
   1192. uṭampuḷainta kaḻutai uppukaḷattiṟkup pōṉatu pōla.
   As the wearied ass went to the salt-pit.
   1193. uṭampu eṭuttavaṉ ellām ōṭu eṭuttāṉ.
   All who have taken a body have taken an alms-dish.
   1194. uṭampu tēṟṟikkoṇṭu allavā yōkattil pōkavēṇṭum?
   Must one not invigorate the body and then proceed to meditation?
   1195. uṭampu eṅkum cuṭukiṟa taḻalai maṭiyilē kaṭṭukiṟāy.
   Thou huggest up in thy bosom the embers that warm every part of the
   body.
   1196. uṭampu muḻutum naṉaintavarukkuk kūtal eṉṉa ?
   Of what consequence is cold to him whose whole body is drenched ?
   1197. uṭalukkō pāl vārttu uṇpatu, ūrukkō pāl vārttu uṇpatu?
   Do we feed on milk for the benefit of the body, or that our neighbours
   may know it?
   1198. uṭal iraṇṭu uyir oṉṟu.
   Divided as regards body, one in soul.
   1199. uṭal oruvaṉukkup piṟantatu nā palarukkup piṟantatu.
   The body is born for one, the tongue for many.
   1200. uṭal uḷḷavaraikkum kaṭal koḷḷāta kavalai.
   Anxieties which the ocean cannot contain attendthe body as long as it
   exists.
   1201. uṭaṉpiṟappu illā uṭampu pāḻ.
   The body of one who has no kindred is exposed to desolation.
   1202. uṭāppuṭaivai pūccikku irai.
   A garment not worn is a prey to moths.
   1203. uṭutta puṭaivaitāṉē pāmpāyk kaṭikkiṟatu.
   The cloth one has put on bites as a snake.
   1204. uṭumpu pōṉālum pōkiṟatu kaiyaiviṭṭāl pōtum.
   The guana may go, it is enough if the hand be free.
   1205. uṭumpukku iraṇṭu nākku maṉitaṉukku oru nāḷukku.
   The guana has two tongues, man only one.
   1206. uṭumpukku iraṇṭu nākku uṇṭu, maṉitaṉukku iraṇṭu nākku uṇṭā ?
   The guana has a double tongue, has man the same?
   1207. uṭai muḷḷukku etirē utaikkalāmā?
   Can you kick against the thorns of the Acacia?
   1208. uṭaimai eṉpatu kalviyuṭaimai.
   Learning is real wealth.
   1209. uṭaimaiyum vaṟumaiyum oru vaḻi nillā.
   Wealth and poverty are not abiding.
   1210. uṭaimaiyum koṭuttu arumaiyum kulaikiṟatā?
   What! give one's property and sacrifice one's reputation?
   1211. uṭaiyavaṉ pārāp payir uruppaṭumā?
   Will a crop not looked after by the owner flourish ?
   1212. uṭaiyavaṉ coṟpaṭi uralaic cuṟṟik kaḷaipaṟi.
   Pluck up the weeds about the mortar as your master bids you.
   1213. uṭaiyavaṉiṟ kaippaṟṟiṉavaṉ miṭukkaṉ.
   An embezzler is more obstinate than the owner.
   1214. uṭaiyavaṉ coṟpaṭi kamukaṭi kaḷaipaṟi.
   Weed around the areca tree at thy master's biding.
   1215. uṭaiyavaṉ illāc cēlai oru muḻam kaṭṭai.
   The cloth whose owner is absent is a cubit too short.
   1216. uṭaiyār vīṭṭu mōrukku akappaik kaṇakku eṉṉa?
   What necessity is there for estimating the quantity of buttermilk by
   the ladle in the homestead of the chief?
   1217. uṭkāntu allavō paṭukka vēṇṭum?
   You must sit before lying down, must you not?
   1218. uṭkāntavaṉaik kaṭṭa māṭṭātavaṉ ōṭukiṟavaṉaik kaṭṭuvāṉā?
   Can he tie a man that is running who cannot tie one that is sitting?
   1219. uṭcuvar irukkap puṟaccuvar pūcalāmā?
   What! beautify the outside of a wall while the inside is neglected?
   1220. uṭcuvar tīṟṟip puṟaccuvar tīṟṟu.
   Garnish the inside of the wall and then the outside.
   1221. uṭpuṟattukku veḷippuṟam kaṇṇāṭi.
   A mirror reflects whatever is before it.
   1222. uṇarvillāk karuviyum uppillāc cōṟum cari.
   A mere instrument void of feeling and food without salt are alike.
   1223. uṇkiṟa cōṟṟilē nañcaik kalakkiṟatā ?
   What, is it to mix poison with the rice one is eating?
   1224. uṇṭa uṭampiṟku uṟuti, uḻuta pulattil nellu.
   There is strength in a body well fed, and grain in the ploughed field.
   1225. uṇṭa piḷḷai urañ ceyyum.
   A child that eats well thrives.
   1226. uṇṭa vayiṟṟukkuc cōṟum moṭṭaittalaikku eṇṇeyumā?
   Is rice required for a full stomach, or oil for a baldhead?
   1227. uṇṭatu tāṉ ēppam varum.
   That which has been eaten will be evidenced in the belching.
   1228. uṇṭa vīṭṭukku iraṇṭakam paṇṇalāmā?
   May hospitality be requited by treachery?
   1229. uṇṭa uṭampu urukum tiṉṟa pākkuc civakkum.
   The body nourished by another's bounty will melt, arecanut when chewed
   turns red.
   1230. uṇṭa cuṟṟam urukum.
   Friendship cemented by food will compassionate.
   1231. uṇṭār mēṉi kaṇṭāl teriyum.
   The body shows who is well fed.
   1232. uṇṭāl tīrum paci, kaṇṭāl tīrumā?
   Hunger is appeased by eating, will it be so by looking at food?
   1233. uṇṭāl tiṉṟāl uṟavu, koṇṭāl koṭuttāl uṟavu.
   Friendship is promoted and strengthned by hospitality and also by
   intermarriage.
   1234. uṇṭālum uṟutippaṭa uṇṇavēṇṭum.
   When you eat, do so to keep up your strength.
   1235. uṇṭāṟ kollum viṣam.
   Poison destroys when taken.
   1236. uṇṭi curuṅkutal peṇṭirkku aḻaku.
   Moderation in food becomes women.
   1237. uṇṭu tiṉṟu uḷḷē iruveṉṟāl uyara eḻumpi ēṉ kutikkiṟāy?
   When you are told to eat heartily and remain in-doors, why do you rise
   up and jump?
   1238. uṇṭu uṟiyil iru eṉṟāl uruṇṭu taraiyil viḻukiṟāy.
   If I say eat and sit on the hanging-shelf, you fall to the ground.
   1239. uṇṭu koḻuttāl naṇṭu vaḷaiyil irātu.
   If a crab gets fat, it will not stay in its hole.
   1240. uṇṭu tiṉṟu uyaram āṉāl ūrilē kāriyam eṉṉa ?
   What business has he in the village seeing that he is grown up?
   1241. uṇṇak kai calittu irukkiṟāṉ.
   His hand is weary with eating.
   1242. uṇṇa vā eṉṟāl kutta varukiṟāy.
   When I call you to eat, you come to strike me.
   1243. uṇṇākkai aṟuttuc cuṇṇāmpukkuṟi iṭuvēṉ.
   I will cut your uvula and smear it with chunam-lime.
   1244. uṇṇāc cottu maṇṇāyp pōkum.
   Property not enjoyed comes to nought.
   1245. uṇṇāmal ūr ellām tiriyalām uṭukkāmal oru vīṭṭukkum pōkalākātu.
   One may wander over the whole country without eating, but one
   may not go to a single house without dressing.
   1246. uṇṇāmal oṉpatu vīṭu pōkalām, uṭukkāmal oru vīṭum pōkal ākātu.
   One may go to nine houses without eating, but not to one without
   garments.
   1247. uṇṇum kīraiyilē naṇṇum pulluruvi.
   Mistleloe attached to edible greens.
   1248. uṇpatu irukka oru karumam ceyyēl.
   Do not go to work without eating.
   1249. uṇpāṉ tiṉpāṉ civappirāmaṇaṉ, kuttukku niṟpāṉ vīra muṣṭi.
   The Saiva Brahman will freely eat, the ferocious mendicant will show
   fight.
   1250. uṇpāraip pārttālum uḻuvāraip pārkkal ākātu.
   Though you look at those who are eating, you may not look at those who
   are ploughing.
   1251. uṇmai collik keṭṭārum poy colli vāḻntārum illai.
   None ever perishes by speaking the truth, none flourishes by uttering
   falsehood.
   1252. utaṭu maṉṟāṭap pōy uḷḷirunta pallum pōṉāṟpōla.
   As if the teeth also went out when the lips had gone to beg.
   1253. utaṭṭilē uḷḷa vāḻaippaḻattai uḷḷē taḷḷuvār uṇṭō ?
   Are there any who push into the mouth the plantain that is already
   between the lips?
   1254. utaṭṭukku miñciṉa pallum tiruṭṭukku miñciṉa kaiyum ākātu.
   Protruding teeth and a hand given to thieving are bad.
   1255. utaṭṭilē puṇ āṉāl pāl kaṟakkātā ?
   Will the cow not yield its milk because it has sore lips?
   1256. utaṭṭut turumpu ūtap pōkātu ?
   A small particle adhering to the lip cannot be removed by blowing.
   1257. utara nimittam veku kirtavēṣam.
   Divers disguises for the sake of the belly.
   1258. utavāp paḻaṅkalamē ōcai illā veṇkalamē!
   Thou art a useless vessel, a piece of brass, without sound!
   1259. utavāta ceṭṭikkuc cīṭṭu eḻutiṉatupōla.
   Like writing a chit to a thrifty merchant.
   1260. utavi ceyvārkku iṭaiyūṟu ētu?
   What, accident can harm those who help others?
   1261. utaṟukāli vantāḷ uḷḷatum keṭuttāḷ.
   A woman with a bustling gait came and destroyed what there was.
   1262. utārikkup poṉṉum turumpu.
   Even gold is a thing of nought to the generous.
   1263. utirattukku allō urukkam irukkum ?
   Sympathy arises, does it not, from consanguinity?
   1264. utaitta kāl puḻukkiṟapōtu allavō puḻukkum?
   Worms will breed in due course, will they not, in a foot accustomed to
   kick?
   1265. utaitta kāl puḻukkiṟataṟku muṉṉē aṭivayiṟu cīḻkaṭṭukiṟatu.
   Before his kicking feet were eaten of worms his abdomen has ulcerated.
   1266. utaippāṉukku veḷuppāṉ cātivaṇṇāṉ.
   He that washes for him who kicks him is a first-rate washerman.
   1267. uttamaṉukkum tappilikkum uṭaṉpaṭikkai vēṇṭām.
   Contracts are needless as regards honest men and cheats.
   The one needs no binding, and the other admits no obligations.
   1268. uttamaccēvakaṉ peṟṟa tāykku atikam.
   A faithful servant is more than a mother.
   1269. uttamaṉukku ettālum kēṭu illai.
   The good are exposed to no danger.
   1270. uttiyōkam puruṣa lakṣaṇam.
   Exertion is a manly quality.
   1271. uttiyōkattukkut takka cukam.
   Facilities suited to one's office.
   1272. upakārattukku apakāram varuvatu turatiṣṭam.
   It is unfortunate when evil is returned for good.
   1273. upacariyāta vīṭṭilē uṇṇātiruppatē oru kōṭi taṉam.
   It is a crore of wealth to abstain from entertainment in a house void
   of civility.
   1274. upacāram ceytavarkku apacāram paṇṇukiṟatā?
   What! are the civil to be requited by incivility!
   1275. upacāra vārttai kācākumā, uṇṭāloḻiyap paci tīrumā?
   Will mere ceremonypass for money, will hunger be appeased otherwise
   than by eating?
   1276. upāyattāl ākiṟatu parākkiramattāl ākumā?
   Can that which may be realized by cunning be obtained by force ?
   1277. uppu irunta pāṇṭamum upāyam irunta neñcamum taṭṭi uṭaiyāmal tāṉē
   uṭaiyum.
   A salt-cup and a deceitful heart will of themselves come to
   destruction.
   1278. uppu irunta pāṇṭamum uṇmai illā neñcum taṭṭi uṭaiyāmal tāṉē
   uṭaiyum.
   A vessel impregnated with salt, and a mind without truth need none to
   destroy them, they destroy themselves.
   1279. uppu illāp paṇṭam kuppaiyilē.
   Unsalted food is fit only for the rubbish heap.
   1280. uppu iṭṭavarkaḷai uḷḷaḷavum niṉai.
   Remember through life those who have given you salt.
   1281. uppu mutal karppūram varaikkum vēṇṭum.
   Every thing from salt to camphor is required.
   Said of things domestic and sacred.
   1282. upput tiṉṟavaṉ taṇṇīraik kuṭippāṉ.
   He who has eaten salt will drink water.
   1283. uppukkaṇṭam paṟikoṭutta pārppātti pōla viḻikkiṟāy.
   Thou starest as the Brahmanee who had lost her salted mutton.
   In her bewilderment she had no remedy because she dared not make known
   the loss of a thing she ought not to have had in her possession.
   1284. uppu vāṇikaṉ aṟivāṉā karppūra vilai ?
   Does the salt merchant know the price of camphor?
   1285. uppuk kaṭṭiṉāl lōkam kaṭṭum.
   If there be a supply of salt the world will be sustained.
   1286. uppum karppūramum oṉṟāy vaḻaṅkumā?
   Are salt and camphor used together?
   1287. uppu nīr mēkam uṇṭāl ulakiṟ piravākam.
   If the ocean were to become clouds, the world would be flooded.
   1288. upput taṇṇīrukku ilāmiccam vēr pōṭavēṇṭumā ?
   Must the root of cusa grass be added to sea-water to make it fragrant?
   1289.uppu miñciṉāl taṇṇīr, taṇṇīr miñciṉāl uppu.
   Excess of salt calls for water, excess of water requires salt.
   1290. uppaic cintiṉaiyō tuppaic cintiṉaiyō?
   Did you spill the salt or the food ?
   1291. uppaittoṭṭu uppait tiṉṉātē.
   Do not use salt both as food and condiment.
   1292. uppait toṭṭukkoṇṭu uralai viḻuṅkalām.
   Using salt as a condiment you may swallow a mortar.
   1293. uppōṭu oṉpatum paruppōṭu pattum vēṇṭum.
   Nine things are required with salt, ten with pulse.
   1294. umakku eṉṉa, vayatukku naraittatō mayirukku naraittatō ?
   Have you grown grey by age, or is your hair prematurely grey?
   1295. umiyaik kuṟṟik kai calittatu pōla.
   As the hand was wearied by beating husks in a mortar.
   1296. uyarap paṟantālum ūrkkuruvi karuṭaṉ ākumā?
   Though it may fly high, will a common bird become a hawk ?
   1297. uyirum uṭalum pōla.
   Like soul and body.
   1298. uyirai vaittirukkiṟatilum cettāṟ kuṇam.
   It is more natural to die than to continue in life.
   1299. uyirōṭu tirumpip pārātavar cettāl muttam koṭuppārā?
   Will he who would not turn to look at me when alive kiss me when dead?
   1300. uyirōṭu oru muttam tarātavaḷ cettāl uṭaṉkaṭṭai
   ēṟuvāḷā?
   Will she who would not kiss me when alive ascend my funeral pyre when I
   am dead?
   1301. uyir iruntāl uppumāṟit tiṉṉalām.
   If one is alive, he may subsist by bartering salt.
   1302. uralil akappaṭṭatu ulakkaikkut tappumā?
   Will that which is in the mortar escape the pestle?
   1303. uralilē talaiyai māṭṭikkoṇṭu ulakkaikkup payappaṭṭāl tīrumā?
   Will your fear of the pestle avail aught after your head has become
   fast in the mortar?
   1304. uralukku oru pakkam iṭi mattaḷattukku iraṇṭu pakkamum iṭi.
   The mortar is beaten at one end the drum at both.
   1305. ural pañcam aṟiyumā?
   Does the rice mortar know what a famine is?
   1306. ural pōy mattaḷattōṭē muṟaiyiṭṭatu pōla.
   As the mortar went to the tomtom with its complaints.
   Used when one complains of his misfortunes to another who is in greater
   distress. The mortar is beaten at one end only, whereas thetomtom is
   beaten at both ends.
   1307. uru ēṟat tiru ēṟum.
   Supernatural power increases according to the intensity of the
   incantations.
   1308. urukkam uḷḷa ciṟṟāttai otukkil vāṭi kaṭṭi aḻa.
   O my loving aunt, come with me apart that we may embraceeach other and
   weep.
   1309. uruci kaṇṭa pūṉai uṟiyait tāvum.
   The cats that has tasted nice things will leap on the swinging-tray.
   1310. uruṭṭap puraṭṭa uḷḷatum uḷḷukku vāṅkum.
   When one deals fraudulently, even that which he has diminishes.
   1311. uruṭṭum puraṭṭum oṭukkum ciṟappai.
   Frauds and trickswill destroy reputation.
   1312. uruṭṭum puraṭṭum miraṭṭum collum.
   Tricks and frauds and threats.
   1313. uruttirākṣap pūṉai oṉṟum teriyātu pōl irukkum.
   Like a beaded cat be appears as if he knew nothing.
   1314. uruttirākṣap pūṉai upatēcam paṇṇiṉatupōla.
   As a beaded cat gave divine instruction.
   1315. uruppaṭat tiruppaṭum.
   As the figure is formed, beauty will become manjfest.
   1316. uruvattai alla kuṇattaippār, paṇattaiyalla caṉattaippār.
   Look to the temper, not beauty, to the connections not at money, when
   choosing a wife.
   1317. uruvattiṉāl alla, iṉpap pēcciṉāl kiḷi naṉkumatikkappaṭum.
   It is not for its form, but for its Sweet prattling that a parrot is
   esteemed.
   1318. uruviya vāḷai uṟaiyil iṭāta vīraṉ.
   A hero who does not sheath his sword.
   1319: ulakattukku ñāṉam pēy, ñāṉattukku ulakam pēy.
   To the world wisdom is folly, to wisdom the world is folly.
   1320. ulakam palavitam.
   The world has many forms.
   1321. ulakilē kaḷḷaṉukku ūrār yāvarum pakai.
   The whole country is at enmity with the thief who dwells there.
   1322. ulakkaippūcaikku acaiyāttu tiruppāṭṭukku acaiyumā?
   Will that which has resisted the strokes of the pestle shake at asacred
   chant?
   1323. ulakkai tēyntu uḷippiṭi āyiṟṟu.
   The pestle by wearing away bas became the bundle of a chisel.
   1324. ulakkai peruttu uttiram āyiṟṟu.
   The pestle grew and became a beam.
   1325. uluttaṉ viruntiṟku oppāṉatu oṉṟum illai.
   Nothing can be compared to the banquet of a miser.
   1326. ulaivāyai mūṭiṉālum ūr vāyai mūṭalāmā?
   You way cover the mouth of a rice-pot, but can you cover the mouth of
   the country?
   1327. ulōpikku iru celavu.
   The avaricious are subject to double expense.
   1328. ullācanaṭai melukkukkuk kēṭu miṉukku eṇṇey talaikkuk kēṭu.
   An affected gait is injurious to graceful movement, and varnish is bad
   for the head.
   1329. uḻak kuḷir aṭittāl nāṟṟup piṭuṅkappaṭātā?
   If it be too cold to plough, why not put out the young plants?
   1330. uḻakku uṟṟārkkup patakkup paratēcikku.
   A quarter of a measure to one's friends, and sixteen measures to &
   religious mendicant.
   1331. uḻakkilē kiḻakku mēṟkā?
   Is the distinction of east and west observable in an ullak a small
   measure of capacity?
   1332. uḻakkilē vaḻakku.
   A dispute about an ullak.
   See the preceding.
   1333. uḻakku miḷaku koṭuppāṉ ēṉ, oḷittiruntu miḷaku nīrkuṭippāṉ ēṉ?
   Why give a measure of pepper, why drink the pepper water in a corner?
   1334. uḻaviṟku ēṟṟa koḻu.
   A plough share adapted to the tillage.
   1335.uḻaviṉ mikutta ūtiyam illai.
   Nothing more advantageous than tillage.
   1336. uḻavu oḻinta māṭu paṭṭippuṟattilē.
   Cattle unfit for the plough are kept outside.
   1337. uḻavu māṭu āṉāl ūrukkuḷḷē vilaippaṭātā?
   If the ox be fit for the plough, will it not fetch a price in its own
   village?
   1338. uḻavukku oru cuṟṟum varātu, ūṇukku muṉṉē varum.
   At the plough it will not go a single round, at foddering time it comes
   first.
   1339. uḻavukkup piṇaittuviṭukiṟa māṭum, kūṭṭukkup piṭittuviṭukiṟa āḷum
   utavātu.
   The bullock yoked to the plough by force, and a man acting as a
   subsitute are alike useless.
   1340. uḻukiṟatai viṭṭu naḻuvukiṟavaṉ teyvam āṭiṉāṟpōla.
   Like one who, to avoid ploughing, feigned to be demonized.
   1341. uḻukiṟa nāḷaiyil ūrukkup pōy, aṟukkiṟa nāḷaiyil arivāḷ
   koṇṭuvantāṟpōla.
   As if one retired into the interior in the ploughing season, and
   returned with a sickle at the approach of harvest.
   1342. uḻukiṟamāṭu paratēcam pōṉāl, aṅku oruvaṉ kaṭṭi uḻuvāṉ iṅku oruvaṉ
   kaṭṭi uḻuvāṉ.
   If a ploughing bullock go astray, it will be yoked wherever found.
   1343. uḻukiṟa māṭṭai nukattāl aṭittāṟpōla.
   Like beating the ploughing ox with the yoke.
   1344. uḻukiṟa māṭṭai erutu nakkiṉatupōla.
   As an ox licked a yoke of oxen when ploughing.
   1345. uḻukiṟavaṉ iḷappamāṉāl erutu macciṉamuṟai koṇṭāṭum.
   The ox treats the unskilful ploughman as his brother-in-law.
   1346. uḻutavaṉukku ūrkkaṇakkuppaṇṇat teriyātu.
   A ploughmanis unable to keep village accounts.
   1347. uḻutavaṉ kaṇakkup pārttāl uḻakkēṉum miñcātu.
   When a ploughman balanceshis accounts, not even an ullak grain remains.
   1348. uḷavaṉ illāmal ūr aḻiyumā?
   Can a.country be destroyed if there be no spy?
   1349.uḷavu illāmal kaḷavu illai.
   NoSpy, no theft.
   1350. uḷaivaḻiyum, aṭaimaḻaiyum, poti erutum, oruvaṉumāy alaikiṟāṉ.
   He wanders alone after a pack-bull, through deepmudand incessantrain.
   1351. uḷvīṭṭuk kaṭaṉum, uḷḷaṅkaic ciraṅkum keṭṭatu.
   To be in debt to an inmate and to have the itch in the palm of the hand
   are intolerable evils.
   1352. uḷḷa piḷḷai uralai nakkikkoṇṭirukka, maṟṟoru
   piḷḷaikkuttiruppatikku naṭakkiṟāḷ.
   While her child licks the mortar, she goes on apilgrimage to Tirupati
   in expectation of another.
   1353. uḷḷaṅkaip pāṟcōṟṟai viṭṭup puṟaṅkai nakkiyatu pōl.
   Like putting rice-milk in the palm and licking the back of the hand.
   1354. uḷḷataik koṇṭu illataip pārāṭṭalām.
   Withwhat we have we may pretend to have that which we have not.
   1355. uḷḷataic coṉṉāl uṭampellām puṇṇām.
   It is said that the whole body breaks out into ulcers when the truth is
   told.
   1356. uḷḷatai viṟṟu nallataik koḷḷu.
   Sell what you have and buy what is really good.
   1357. uḷḷaṉum kaḷḷaṉumāy irukkiṟāṉ.
   He is both an inmate and a thief.
   1358. uḷḷaṅkaiyil oṉpatu koṇṭai muṭippēṉ.
   I will tie nine knots of hair in the palm of the hand.
   1359. uḷḷaṅkaiyil nellikkaṉipōla.
   Like the Nelli berry (Phyllanthus simplex) in the palm of the hand.
   Said of something unmistakably evident.
   1360.uḷḷaṅkaiyil urōmamuḷaitta tāyiṉ, aṟivilāṉ aṭaṅkuvāṉ.
   If it be that hair has sprung up in the palm of the hand, a fool may
   yield to discipline.
   1361.uḷḷaṉum kaḷḷaṉum kūṭiṉāl viṭikiṟa maṭṭum tiruṭalām.
   When an inmate of a house joins the thief, stealing may be carriedon
   till day- break.
   1362. uḷḷataic coṉṉāl noḷḷaikkaṇṇikku nōppāḷam.
   If the truth be told, the blind woman will be greatly afflicted.
   1363. uḷḷatai ellām koṭuttu noḷḷaikkaṇṇiyaik koṇṭāṉām.
   It is said that he took to wife a blind girl having given away all he
   had.
   1364.uḷḷavaṉ piḷḷai uppōṭu uṇṇum, illātavaṉ piḷḷai carkkaraiyōṭu uṇṇum.
   The child of the wealthy takes salt with his food, the child of this
   poor, sugar.
   1365. uḷḷakkaruttu vaḷḷalukkut teriyum.
   Our inmost thoughts are known to God.
   1366.uḷḷataic coṉṉāl ellārukkum pakai.
   When the truth is told, every one takesit ill.
   1367. uḷḷataiyum keṭuttāṉ koḷḷik kaṇṇaṉ.
   The evil-eyed destroyed even what there was.
   1368. uḷḷataic coṉṉavaṉ ūrukkup pollātavaṉ.
   He who speaks the truth is regarded as a wicked person by the country.
   1369. uḷḷāḷum kaḷḷāḷum kūṭṭamā?
   Is association between an inmate and a thief to be tolerated?
   1370. uḷḷiruntārkkut teriyum uḷvaruttam.
   Internal distress is known to the inmates.
   1371. uḷḷūr marumakaṉum uḻukiṟa kaṭāvum cari.
   A son-in-law of the same village and a ploughing buffalo are over
   wrought.
   1372. uḷḷē koṭṭiṉa tēḷē oru mantiram collukiṟēṉ kēḷē.
   O thou scorpion thou hast thrust thy sting into me, listen, I will
   utter an incantation.
   1373. uḷḷē pakaiyum utaṭṭilē uṟavumā?
   What! is itenmity at heart and friendship on the lips?
   1374. uḷḷē vayiṟeriya utaṭu paḻam coriya.
   Bowels burning within, lips shedding ripe fruit.
   1375. uṟavilē nañcu kalakkiṟatā ?
   What! is poison to be mixed with friendship?
   1376. uṟavupōla iruntu kuḷavipōlak koṭṭukiṟatā?
   What ! to feign friendship and to sting as a wasp?
   1377. uṟavu uṟavutāṉ paṟiyilē kai vaikkātē.
   No doubt about friendship, but do not put your hand into my basket.
   1378. uṟavukkum pakaikkum poruḷē tuṇai.
   Wealth may aid both in friendship and enmity.
   1379. uṟavukku oṉpatu paṭi ūrukkup pattup paṭi.
   Nine measures for your friends and ten for the country.
   1380. uṟi aṟa mūḷi nāykku vēṭṭai
   The snapping of the cord of the swinging-tray is like a hunting
   excursion to the cropped dog.
   1381. uṟiyilē tayir irukka ūr eṅkum pōṉāṟpōl.
   As if one sought curds throughout the village when a supply was on his
   own tray.
   1382. uṟiyilē veṇṇey irukka neykku alaivāṉēṉ?
   Why go about in quest of ghee when you have butter on your own tray?
   1383. uṟiyiṟ paṇam pōyt teruviṟ caṇṭaiyai iḻukkiṟatu.
   The money on the swinging-tray goes out and picks a quarrel in the
   public road.
   Money is not infrequently put on a swinging tray in a cap or small
   basket.
   1384. uṟutiyāṉa kāriyam orupōtum keṭātu.
   An affair firmly settled will never fail.
   1385. uṟutīṅkukku utavātavaṉ uṟṟavaṉā?
   Is he a friend who helps not in adversity?
   1386. uṟcākam ceytāl maccait tāṇṭuvāṉ.
   If encouraged, he will jump over the house top.
   1387. uṟṟa cinēkitaṉ uyirkku amirtam.
   A true friend is the nectar of life.
   1388. uṟṟatu coṉṉāl aṟṟatu poruntum.
   When the truth is told, a breach between friends may be healed.
   1389. uṟṟatu colla ūrum alla, nallatu colla nāṭum alla.
   This is not the village in which a man may speak the truth, nor the
   country in which, to give advice.
   1390. uṟṟār tiṉṟāl puṟṟāy viḷaiyum, ūrār tiṉṟāl pērāy viḷaiyum.
   If friends consume one's grain an ant hole, if strangers consume it,
   fame.
   1391. uṟṟārukku oṉṟum koṭāṉ, namaṉārukku nālum koṭuppāṉ.
   He will give nothing to friends, but to Yama the regent of the dead he
   will give even four i. e., all.
   1392. uṟṟār utavuvārō aṉṉiyar utavuvārō?
   Will friends help or will strangers ?
   1393. uṉakkum pēpē uṉ appaṉukkum pēpē .
   Pe, pe to you, and pe pe to your father also.
   The following story is told about this proverb:-a debtor had two
   creditors. One of them said if you will pay me I will suggest an
   expedient for getting rid of the other creditor. He then instructed him
   when again applied to for payment, to feign madness, and to say Pé,
   Pé-a demon, a demon. The creditor not satisfied had him summoned before
   a Magistrate where he did as before. The Magistrate thinking the debtor
   mad, decided that he was not amenable to a court of justice. The other
   creditor then went to the debtor expecting to be paid according to
   promise. To his surprise the man said Pe,Pe, whereupon he said, do you
   deal with me also in this way, when, the debtor
   replied as the proverb stands.
   1394. uṉakku yāṉ apayam eṉakku nī upayam.
   I am under your protection, you are my patron.
   1395. uṉ cāmarttilē kuṇṭu pāyātu.
   Bullets will not fly by your strength.
   1396. uṉ collilē uppum illai puḷiyum illai.
   In your words there is neither salt nor acid.
   1397. uṉ muṟukkut tirukku ellām eṉ uṭuppukkuḷḷē.
   Your petulance and fraud are all in my dress.
   1398. uṉṉai vañcittavaṉai orupōtum nampātē.
   Never trust one who has deceived you.
   1399. uṉṉaik koṭuppēṉō ceṉṉaik kūṉi, nī cumai cumantallō kūṉippōṉāy.
   O thou hunch-backed woman of Madras, how can I give thee up, hast thou
   not become crooked by bearing burdens ?
   1400. ūcal āṭiyum taṉ nilaiyil niṟkum.
   Though the swing oscillates, it will resume its proper centre.
   1401. ūci oru muḻattuṇiyaiyāvatu koṭukkum uṟṟār eṉṉa koṭuppār?
   A needle will give a cubit of cloth, what will your friends give ?
   1402. ūci koḷḷap pōyt tulām kaṇakkup pārkkiṟatā?
   When going to buy a needle, is the weight to be regarded?
   1403. ūci kōkkiṟataṟku ūril tuḷāvāram ēṉ?
   Why such a stir in the village about threading a needle ?
   1404. ūcikkuk kaḷḷaṉ uṭaṉē iruppāṉ.
   Where there is a needle there will be a thief.
   1405. ūcikku ūci etirēṟip pāyumā?
   Can one needle penetrate another when brought point to point?
   1406. ūci poṉṉāṉāl eṉṉa peṟum?
   Though made of gold what will a needle fetch?
   1407. ūci pōkiṟatu kaṇakkup pārppāṉ pūcaṉikkāy pōkiṟatu teriyātu.
   He notes the loss of needles, but not that of pumpkins.
   1408. ūcipōla miṭaṟum tāḻipōla vayiṟum.
   A throat like a needle, a belly like a caldron.
   1409. ūci maliveṉṟu cīmaikkup pōkalāmā?
   May one go to a foreign country to buy needles because they are there
   cheap?
   1410. ūci muṉaiyil tavam ceytālum uḷḷatutāṉ kiṭaikkum.
   Though penance be performed by standing on the point of a needle, that
   which is predestined only will be obtained.
   1411. ūciyiṉ kātil oṭṭakam nuḻaiyumā ?
   Can a camel pass through the eye of a needle ?
   1412. ūciyai ūcikkāntam iḻukkum, uttamaṉaic ciṉēkam iḻukkum.
   A magnet attracts a needle, friendship, the good.
   1413. ūṇaṉ karumam iḻantāṉ, uluttaṉ peyar iḻantāṉ.
   The glutton failed in his object, and the miser lost his fame.
   1414. ūṇiṉāl uṟavu pūṇiṉāl aḻaku.
   Friendship is promoted by entertainments, and beauty is set off by
   ornaments.
   1415. ūṇiṉāl putti pūṇiṉāl cāti.
   Good sense is indicated by food, and rank by ornaments.
   1416. ūṇukku muntavēṇṭum kōḷukkup pintavēṇṭum.
   Be first at a feast, and the last to slender.
   1417. ūṇum illai uṟakkamum illai.
   Neither food nor sleep.
   1418. ūṇ aṟṟapōtē uṟavu aṟṟuppōm.
   When entertainment is discontinued, friendship ceases.
   1419. ūṇpākku oḻiya vīṇpākku ākātu.
   Betel is not good except after food.
   1420. ūta aṟintavaṉ vāti uppu aṟintavaṉ yōki.
   He is an alchemist who knows how to infuse metals, and he is a Yogi who
   knows the quality of salt.
   1421. ūtārikkup poṉṉum turumpu.
   Even gold is a mere rush to the spendthrift.
   1422. ūtiṉāṟ pōm uṟiñciṉāl varum.
   If blown it will fly off, if sucked it will go in.
   1423. ūtukiṟa caṅku ūtiṉāl viṭikiṟapōtu viṭikiṟatu.
   If you blow the conch, the day will break as it is wont.
   1424. ūttaivāyaṉ tēṭa nāṟṟavāyaṉ tiṉṉa.
   Acquired by the filthy mouthed and consumed by the fetid mouthed.
   1425. ūttai tiraṇṭu accāṇi ākumā?
   Will the dirt on one's body when collected form a linch-pin?
   1426. ūttaivāyaṉ tēṭak karppūravāyaṉ tiṉṉa.
   Accumulated by the foul mouthed and consumed by a mouth fragrant with
   camphor.
   1427. ūttai pōkak kuḷittavaṉum illai pacipōkat tiṉṟavaṉum illai.
   No one performs ablutions so as not to repeat them, nor does any one
   eat so as not, again to suffer hunger.
   1428. ūmai ūraik keṭukkum āmai kiṇaṟṟaik keṭukkum.
   The dumb destroys a village, a tortoise or turtle destroys a well.
   1429. ūmai ūraik keṭukkum peruccāḷi vīṭṭaik keṭukkum.
   A community is injured by the dumb, and a house by bandycootes.
   1430. ūmai kaṇṭa kaṉāppōl irukkiṟatu.
   It is like the dream of the dumb.
   He is unable to relate his dream and therefore cannot obtain its
   interpretation.
   1431. ūmaikku uḷaṟuvāyaṉ uṟpātapiṇṭam.
   The dumb regards a babbler as a wonder.
   1432. ūmaiyaṉ pēccu paḻakiṉa pērukkut teriyum.
   The speech-gesticulation of the dumb is known to those accustomed to
   it.
   1433. ūmaiyāyiruntāl ceviṭum uṇṭu.
   If one is dumb he is deaf also.
   1434. ūmaiyum ūmaiyum mūkkaic coṟintāṟpōla.
   As the dumb on meeting the dumb scratch their noses.
   If a person on meeting a dumb man scratches his own nose the dumb man
   becomes very angry.
   1435. ūmaiyum alla ceviṭum alla.
   Neither dumb nor deaf.
   1436. ūrāraip pakaittu uyirōṭu iruntavar illai.
   No one at enmity with the whole community ever preserved his life.
   1437. ūrār kaṇakku uṭaiyavaṉ piṭariyilē.
   The liabilities of a village are on the neck of its chief.
   1438. ūrār uṭaimaikkup pēyāyp paṟakkiṟāṉ.
   He flies on the property of others like a demon.
   1439. ūrār erumai pāl kaṟakkiṟatu nīyum ūṭṭu nāṉum uṇṇukiṟēṉ.
   The buffalo of the village is in milk, you suck and I will also suck.
   1440. ūrilē kalyāṇam mārpilē cantaṉam.
   Marriage ceremonies in the village and sandal paste on the breast.
   1441. ūril oruvaṉē tōḻaṉ ārum aṟṟatē tāram.
   Have one only of the community as a friend, and a woman without ties as
   a wife.
   1442. ūril eḷiyārai vaṇṇāṉ aṟivāṉ cātippoṉ pūṇṭārait taṭṭāṉ aṟivāṉ.
   The washerman knows the poor of a village, the goldsmith knows whose
   ornaments are made of fine gold.
   1443. ūrukkellām oru vaḻi uṉakku oru vaḻiyā ?
   While all the people of the village have one road in common, do you
   expect one for yourself ?
   1444. ūrukkup pāl vārttu uṇṇukiṟāyā uṭampukkup pālvārttu uṇṇukiṟāyā?
   Do you take milk on account of the community or to promote your own
   health?
   1445. ūrukkellām cāstiram collukiṟa palli kūḻppāṉaiyil viḻuntāṟpōla.
   As if a lizard, the oracle of the whole village, should fall into a pot
   of gruel.
   Spoken reproachfully, when a person remarkable either by position or
   profession, has done something injurious to his reputation.
   The lizard-palli a newt-here referred to, is seen on the walls of
   houses in India and Ceylon, and its chirp may be frequently heard. Its
   voice is never disregarded since it may bear a message of great
   consequence to the family or individual concerned. A small book called
   the Shaster of the Lizard contains all needed information regarding its
   chirping. On hearing it the facts to be observed are the point of the
   compass, the hour of the day &c. These being known the party has
   recourse to his formula and ascertains whether the omen is auspicious
   or not. The premonitions of this little domestic monitor derive their
   significance from the character of the preternatural regent who may at
   the time preside over the region indicated by the chirp. Thus it
   appears that the shaster of the domestic lizard is based on the dogmas
   of Astrology.
   1446. ūrukku ākātavaṉ vīṭṭukkum ākāṉ.
   He who is useless abroad is useless at home.
   1447. ūrukku ākāta piḷḷai tāykku ākumā?
   Is a child injurious to the community, of any use to its mother?
   1448. ūrukku ōmal vīṭṭukku vayiṟṟericcal.
   Fame abroad and famine at home.
   1449. ūrukku iḷaittavaṉ piḷḷaiyārkōyil āṇṭi.
   He who was too feeble for the service of the community became a devotee
   in the temple of Genesha.
   In Sanskrit a similar proverb exists : “The dancing girl being old has
   become a devotee”. It is a case not of breaking away from sinful
   habits, but the power of sinning is gone.
   1450. ūruṭaṉ pakaikkil vēruṭaṉ keṭum.
   If one is hated by the whole community he will be rooted out.
   1451. ūreṅkum pēr vīṭu paṭṭiṉi.
   Fame throughout the country, at home starvation.
   1452. ūrellām vāḻkiṟateṉṟu vīṭellām puraṇṭu aḻutāl varumā?
   Can you gain anything by wallowing and weeping because the village is
   prosperous?
   1453. ūrellām cuṟṟi eṉakku eṉṉa putti eṉkiṟāṉ.
   Having wandered all over the country he says, what advice do you give.
   1454. ūrellām uṟṟār antipaṭṭāl poti cantiyilē.
   He has friends in every part of the village, yet his bundle is left in
   the public road after sun-set.
   1455. ūreṉṟu iruntāl paṟaiccēriyum irukkum.
   Wherever there is a village there is a Paracheri.
   A Parachery is a hamlet of Pariahs—non caste Natives. Pariahs are
   employed in the lowest offices, as beaters of the tomtom or Native drum
   on festive and mournful occasions. They are employed to publish
   proclamations &c, as a bell-man in Europe.
   1456. ūrai uḻakkāl aḷakkiṟāḷ nāṭṭai nāḻiyāl aḷakkiṟāḷ.
   She measures the village with an ulak and the province with a nali.
   The uḻakku is a quarter of a paṭi. uḻakkāḻākku three eighth of a
   measure. A nāḻi is a measure, of which there are eight in amarakkāl ,
   marcal.
   1457. ūraip pārkkac coṉṉāl paṟaiccēriyaip pārkkiṟāṉ.
   When told to visit the village, he goes to the Pariah quarter.
   1458. ūraip piṭitta caṉi piḷḷaiyāraiyum piṭittatu.
   Saturn that seized the village seized also Ganesha. One thing happens
   to all.
   1459. ūrai vaḷaittālum uṟṟa tuṇai illai, nāṭṭai vaḷaittālum nalla tuṇai
   illai.
   Though one goes round the village he finds no help, though he goes
   round the country no real aid can be got.
   1460. ūrōṭa okka ōṭu nāṭōṭa naṭu ōṭu.
   If the people of the village flee, join them, if the whole country
   flee, flee in their midst.
   1461. ūrōccam vīṭu paṭṭiṉi.
   Distinguished abroad, starving at home.
   1462. ūr āḷukiṟavaṉ peṇṭu piṭittāl āruṭaṉ colli muṟaiyiṭukiṟatu?
   When the ruler of a village forcibly takes away another man's wife, to
   whom is be to make his complaint ?
   1463. ūr irukkiṟatu ōṭu irukkiṟatu.
   The village still exists and also the alms-dishes.
   1464. ūr iraṇṭu paṭṭāl kūttāṭikkuk koṇṭāṭṭam.
   If the village be divided into two parties, it will be advantageous to
   the commedians.
   1465. ūr iḷappam vaṇṇāṉukkut teriyum.
   That which is bad or exceptionable in a village is known to its
   washerman.
   The clothes of all pass through his hands, he has therefore the
   opportunity of inferring much from their condition.
   1466. ūr uṇṭu piccaikku, kuḷam uṇṭu taṇṇīrukku.
   There is a village for alms, and a tank for water.
   1467. ūr ōrattiṟ kollai uḻutavaṉukkup payir illai.
   He that cultivates a field on the outskirts of a village loses its
   produce.
   1468. ūr kūṭic cekkut taḷḷiṉāṟpōla.
   As if a whole village united to put an oil-press in motion.
   1469. ūrkkuruvimēl rāmapāṇam toṭukkiṟatā?
   What, discharge Rama's arrow at a sparrow ?
   Why lavish means so preciouson objectsso mean?
   1470. ūrkkōḻiyum nāṭṭukkōḻiyum kūṭi uraliṟ puḻuṅkal aricikkuc cētam.
   When the poultry of the village and the poultry of the country at large
   come together, the rice in the mortar is spoiled.
   1471. ūr naṣṭam ūrilē tēr naṣṭam teruvilē.
   Loss occurring in a village affects the community, injury occasioned by
   a temple car is apparent in the street.
   1472. ūr nallatō vāy nallatō?
   Is the village good or your description?
   1473. ūrppiḷḷaiyai muttamiṭṭāl, utaṭṭukkuk kēṭu.
   To kiss the child of another is bad for the lips.
   1474. ūr vāyaip paṭaliṭṭu mūṭalāmā?
   Is it possible to shut the mouth of a village by a hurdle?
   1475. ūr vāḻntāl ōṭṭuppiccaikkum vaḻi irukkum.
   If the village be prosperous—there will be an opening for alms-dishes.
   1476. ūḻikkāyccal atikam āṉāl cūṉiyakkāraṉ koḷḷai.
   When epidemic fever prevails, sorcerers abound.
   1477. ūḻi pēriṉum ūkkamatu kaiviṭēl.
   Though the world come to an end do not remit your efforts.
   1478. ūḻiṟ peruvali oṉṟu uṇṭō ?
   Is there any power greater than destiny?
   1479.ūḻum uṟcākamum ottukkoḷḷavēṇṭum.
   Destiny and exertion must go together.
   1480. ūṉṟak koṭutta taṭi ucciyai uṭaikkiṟatu.
   The staff I gave for his support breaks the crown of my head.
   1481. eṅkaḷāl oṉṟum illai ellām uṅkaḷ karmam.
   Nothing lies in our might, all must be done by you.
   1482.eṅkum maṭamāy irukkiṟatu irukkattāṉ iṭam illai.
   Choultries everywhere, but no place of accommodation.
   1483.eṅkē aṭittālum nāy kālait tūkkum.
   No matter where hit, adog when struck, lifts up his leg.
   1484. eṅkē pukai uṇṭō aṅkē neruppu uṇṭu.
   Wherever there is smoke there is fire.
   1485. eccilait tiṉṟu ēppam iṭṭāṟpōla.
   Like belching after eating leavings.
   1486. eccilait tiṉṟu paci tīrumā ?
   Can hunger be appeased by eating leavings?
   1487. ecciṟkallaikku maṇṇāṅkaṭṭiātaravu maṇṇāṅkaṭṭikku
   ecciṟkallai ātaravu.
   A clod is the support of the leaf-plate, and the leaf-plate is the
   support of the clod.
   1488.eccil irakka aṭikkum, paṟṟu paṟakka aṭikkum.
   Spitting about will drive one to beggary, and ceremonial impurity will
   scatter a family.
   1489. ecciṟkaiyāl kākkai ōṭṭamāṭṭāṉ.
   He will not scare away a crow with an unwashen hand.
   1490. eccil eṭukkac coṉṉārkaḷā ettaṉaipēr cāppiṭṭateṉṟu kaṇakkup
   pārkkac coṉṉārkaḷā?
   Did they order the leavings to be removed, or an account to be taken of
   the number who had eaten?
   1491. eccil tiṉṟālum vayiṟu niṟaiyat tiṉṉa vēṇṭum, ēccukkēṭṭālum poḻutu
   viṭikiṟa maṭṭum kēṭkavēṇṭum.
   If you eat offal eat heartily, if you listen to abusive language,
   listen till day-break.
   1492. eccililaikku nāy aṭittukkoṇṭu niṟkiṟatu pōla.
   As dogs impatiently wait for leaf-plates.
   1493. eccilaik kaḻuvi uṉ cuttattilē vār.
   Wash off the refuse and pour the water on your clean person.
   Spoken in derision of affected cleanliness.
   1494. eṭukka muṉṉam kaḻutai iṭuppu oṭintu viḻuntatām.
   It is said that the ass fell down with a broken hip as soon as it was
   loaded.
   1495. eṭukkap pōṉa cīmāṭṭi iṭuppu oṭintu viḻuntāḷām.
   It is said that the wealthy matron, whom one had gone to take in
   marriage, fell down, her waist having broken.
   1496. eṭuttālum paṅkāruppeṭṭiyai eṭukkavēṇṭum iruntālumciṅkārakkaḻuvil
   irukkavēṇṭum.
   If you steal, take away a golden casket;if you are impaled, endure the
   punishment on an ornamented stake.
   1497. eṭutta cumai cumantallō iṟakka vēṇṭum?
   A burden must be first carried, must it not, before it is put down?
   1498. eṭuttu āḷāta poruḷ utavātu.
   Things unused, spoil.
   1499. eṭutta aṭi maṭaṅkumā?
   Will the lifted foot be drawn back?
   1500. eṭuttuviṭṭa erutu ettaṉai nāḷ uḻum ?
   How long can an ox plough that requires to be lifted up?
   1501. eṭuppatu piccai ēṟuvatu pallakku.
   His occupation is begging, his conveyance a palanquin.
   1502. eṭuppārum piṭippārum uṇṭāṉāl iḷaippum tavippum uṇṭu.
   Where many are in attendance to lift up and support, there will be
   weariness and fainting.
   1503. eṭuppār kaik kuḻantai.
   A baby in the arms.
   1504. eṭuppār maḻuvait taṭuppār puliyaik koṭuppār arumai.
   There are who take up the battle axe, and there are who stop tigers,
   but givers are scarce.
   1505. eṭuppuṇṭa kalappai iruntu uḻumā?
   Will a worn out plough last long?
   1506. eṭṭāp paḻattaip pārttuk koṭṭāvi viṭṭatu pōla.
   As one gazed and gaped at a fruit beyond his reach.
   1507. eṭṭāp pū tēvarkku eṭṭum pūtaṅkaḷukku.
   Flowers beyond reach are sacred to God, but those within reach are for
   themselves.
   1508. eṭṭik kuṭṭi iṟaṅkik kālaip piṭittukkoḷḷukiṟatā?
   What! is it to reach up and cuff, and cower and cling to the feet ?
   1509. eṭṭi paḻuttu eṉṉa , īyātār vāḻntu eṉṉa ?
   What if the fruit of the etti tree (strychnos nux vomica) ripens ; of
   what use is the prosperity of the niggardly?
   1510. eṭṭimaramāṉālum pacceṉṟu irukkavēṇṭum.
   Though a poisonous tree, it should be green.
   1511. eṭṭi maramāṉālum vaitta marattai veṭṭātē.
   Cut not down the tree you planted though it is the (strychnosnux
   vomica.)
   I have observed among many natives a remarkable disinclination, to cut
   down trees: though not rational creatures they are said to have one
   sense.aṟivu.
   1512. eṭṭikkup pāl vārttu vaḷarttālum tittippu uṇṭākumā ?
   Although you may nourish an etti tree by pouring milk at its root, will
   it become sweet?
   1513. eṭṭiyilē kaṭṭumāmpaḻam uṇṭāmō?
   Will an etti tree bear graft-mangoes?
   1514. eṭṭiyuṭaṉē cērnta ilavum tīppaṭum.
   Even the silk-cotton tree growing by the etti will also be consumed by
   fire.
   Evil association brings destruction.
   1515. eṭṭiṉāl, kuṭumiyaip piṭikkiṟatu. eṭṭāviṭṭāl kālaip piṭikkiṟatu.
   If it can be reached, seizing by the kudumi knot of hair, if not,
   clinging to the feet.
   1516.eṭṭi eṭṭip pārttuk kuṭṭiccuvarilē muṭṭikkoḷḷalāmā ?
   Can you strike your head against a dwarf wall when peeping on tiptoe?
   1517.eṭṭi eṭṭip pārppārum ēṇi vaittup pārppārum kuṭṭiccuvarālē
   kuṉintu niṉṟu pārppārum uṇṭu.
   There are who peep on tiptoe, there arewho peep on a ladder, there are
   those who peep over a dwarf wall crouching.
   1518. eṭṭimaramāṉālum vaittavarkkup pakṣam.
   Though an etti tree, he who planted it will like it.
   1519. eṭṭippaḻattai iccikkiṟatā?
   What, is an etti fruit to be desired?
   1520. eṭṭuk kiḻavarum oru moṭṭaik kiḻaviyaik kaṭṭikkoṇṭārkaḷ.
   Eight old men conjointly took to wife a bald-headed old woman.
   1521. eṭṭuk kuñcu aṭittālum caṭṭikkaṟi ākātu.
   Eight chickens are not sufficient for a chatty of curry.
   1522. eṭṭu varuṣattu erumaikkaṭā ērikkup pōka vaḻi tēṭukiṉṟatu.
   A buffalo eight years old is at a loss to find its way to the tank.
   1523. eṇcāṇ uṭampum oru cāṇāṉēṉ.
   My eight-span body is reduced to one span.
   1524. eṇcāṇ uṭampilē eḷḷattaṉai nāṇam illai.
   There is not a grain of modesty in his eight-span body.
   1525. eṇcāṇ uṭampiṟkum ciracē piratāṉam.
   The head is the chief part of the eight-span body.
   1526. eṇṇam ellām poy emaṉ ōlai mey.
   All our thoughts are vain, the ola of Yama is real.
   Ola is the name of the Palmyra palm leaf. On this material, books,
   accounts, correspondence &c., are written with an iron pen. Several of
   the Tamil books I first read were written on ola. Yama, the regent of
   the dead, is graphically represented as stretching out his hand to
   deliver the order for departure.
   1527. eṇṇa m ellām poy ēḷitam mey.
   Expectations are all unreal, a despicable condition is a reality.
   1528. eṇṇaṟak kaṟṟu eḻuttaṟa vācittālum peṇ putti piṉ puttiyē.
   No matter how skilled a woman may be in numbers and letters, her
   judgment will be second rate.
   Many modern Hindus of the day(1873, though themselves earnest about
   University honors, evince but very little interest regarding the
   intellectual and moral culture of their daughters. The Rev R. M.
   Banerjee, a learned brahman of Calcutta, very recently gave a sad
   account of the disabilities to which native ladies in that city are
   subject.
   1529. eṇṇappaṭṭa kutirai ellām maṇṇaip pōṭṭukkoḷḷa,
   taṭṭuvāṇikkutirai vantu koḷḷukku aḻukiṟatām.
   Whilst horses of the first blood liek the ground, the miserable tattoo
   is neighing for gram.
   1530. eṇṇam aṟṟa irācaṉ paṉṟivēṭṭai āṭiṉāṟpōl.
   As an incautions king went to hunt wild hog.
   1531. eṇṇam ellām poy eḻutiya eḻuttu mey.
   All imaginations may be false, that which is written is true, certain.
   1532. eṇ illātavar kaṇ illātavar, eḻuttu illātavar kaḻuttu illātavar.
   Those who are ignorant of figures have no eyes, those who are ignorant
   of letters have no head.
   1533. eṇṇic ceykiṟavaṉ ceṭṭi eṇṇāmaṟ ceykiṟavaṉ maṭṭi.
   He who acts after due consideration is a chitty a superior man, he who
   acts without consideration is a matti a fool.
   1534.eṇṇic ceyvatu ceṭṭu eṇṇāmaṟ ceyvatu vēḷāṇmai.
   Trade requires forethought, agriculture requires none.
   1535. eṇṇiya eṇṇam eṉṉaṭi aṇṇā eṉṟu aḻaitta muṟai eṉṉaṭi?
   What was our expectation, and what led you to call me elder brother?
   1536. eṇṇit tuṇivatu karumam, tuṇintapiṉ eṇṇuvatu iḻukku.
   An action undertaken after due consideration may prove successful,
   consideration after action may end in disgrace.
   1537. eṇṇiya kuṭikku oru miṉṉiya muṭi.
   A brilliant crowd for an illustrious family.
   1538. eṇṇey muntukiṟatō tiri muntukiṟatō?
   It is questionable which will be first consumed, the oil or the wick.
   1539. eṇṇey pōka muḻukiṉālum eḻuttup pōkat tēyppār uṇṭā ?
   Although oil may be washed off, can the writing of Brahma be rubbed
   off?
   1540. eṇṇeyc celavoḻiya piḷḷai piḻaitta pāṭu illai.
   As regards the child's recovery, nothing has resulted but an
   expenditure of oil.
   1541. eṇṇeyk kuṭattaic cuṟṟum eṟumpu pōla.
   Like ants round a pot of oil.
   1542. eṇṇeyp piḷḷaiyō vaṇṇap piḷḷaiyō ?
   In the beauty attributable to oil, or is it real ?
   1543. eṇ mikuttavaṉē tiṇ mikuttavaṉē.
   He who excels in figures excels in strength.
   1544. etākutala pēciṉāl akappaic cūṉiyam vaippēṉ.
   If you speak a word, I will place before you an empty ladle.
   1545. etārttavāti veku caṉa virōti.
   He who is truthful may be the enemy of many.
   1546. etiri iḷaippamāṉāl kōpam caṇṭappiracaṇṭam.
   If the opposite party be inferior in position, the anger of his enemy
   will rage like a tempest.
   1547. etirikku iḷakkāramāyc collukiṟatā?
   What, is it to yield to an opponent ?
   1548. etirtta vīṭu ēkāli vīṭu, aṭutta vīṭu ampaṭṭaṉ vīṭu.
   The house opposite is the washerman's, and my next door neighbour is a
   barber.
   1549. etirvīṭu ēkāli vīṭu, pakkattu vīṭu paṇi ceypavaṉ vīṭu, aṭutta
   vīṭu ampaṭṭaṉ vīṭu.
   The opposite house is the washerman's, the adjoining house is the
   goldsmith's, and the next to mine is that of the barber.
   1550. etirttavaṉ ēḻai eṉṟāl kōpam caṇṭāḷam.
   When the opposed is poor, the anger of his opponent ends in cruelty.
   1551. etu eppaṭip pōṉālum taṉ kāriyam taṉakku .
   No matter how any thing may go, each should mind his own business.
   1552. ettaṉaitāṉ tulakkiṉālum pittaḷai nāṟṟam pōkumā?
   No matter how frequently it may be polished, the bad odour of brass
   will not leave it.
   1553. ettaṉai puṭam iṭṭālum irumpu pacumpoṉ ākātu.
   Though iron may be heated never so much, it will not become gold.
   1554. ettaṉai ēḻai āṉālum elumiccaṅkāy attaṉai poṉ illāmaṟpōmā?
   However poor one may be, will he not possess gold, at least of the
   value of alemon ?
   1555. ettāṟ piḻaikkalām ottāṟ piḻaikkalām.
   How may we subsist ? if united we may subsist.
   1556. ettilē piḷḷai peṟṟu iravalilē tālāṭṭukiṟatu.
   Bringing forth a child without cost, and rocking it in a borrowed
   cradle.
   1557. ettēca kālamum vaṟṟāp peruñ camuttiram.
   An ocean that knows no ebb anywhere at any time.
   1558. enta āyutamum tīṭṭattīṭṭak kūrum.
   The more an instrument is whetted, the sharper it becomes.
   1559. enta ilai utirntālum īccam ilai utirātu.
   Though the leaves of other trees may fall off, those of the date-palm
   will not.
   1560. entap puṟṟilē entap pāmpu irukkiṟatō teriyātu.
   It is not known what species of snake may be found in any particular
   hole.
   1561. enta vākkup poyttālum cantavākkup poyyātu.
   Whatever else may fail the words, marks, of low breeding will not fail.
   1562. ennēramum avaḷ pēril kaṇṇāy irukkiṟāṉ.
   His eye is always upon her.
   1563. emaṉukku vaḻikāṭṭuvāṉ.
   He can pilot Yama, the regent of the dead.
   1564. emaṉ piḷḷaiyaip pēy piṭikkumā ?
   Will a demon seize the child of Yama, the regent of the dead?
   1565. eykiṟavaṉ eytāl ampu eṉṉa ceyyum?
   What can the arrow do if discharged by a skilful archer ?
   1566. eytavaṉ irukka ampai nōvāṉēṉ?
   Why blame the arrow, letting the archer go free?
   1567. erikiṟa koḷḷiyai ēṟat taḷḷiṉatupōla.
   As a burning firebrand was pushed into the hearth.
   1568. erikiṟa koḷḷiyil entak koḷḷi nalla koḷḷi?
   Which of the burning firebrands is the best ?
   1569. erikiṟataip piṭuṅkiṉāl kotikkiṟatu aṭaṅkum.
   If the burning fuel be removed, the bubbling will cease.
   1570. erikiṟa neruppai eṇṇey viṭṭu avikkalāmā?
   May a burning fire be extinguished by pouring oil on it ?
   1571. erikiṟa neruppilē ney viṭṭatu pōla.
   As if ghee were poured on a flaming fire.
   1572. erikiṟa vīṭṭai avikkak kiṇaṟu veṭṭa nāḷ pārttatu pōla.
   Like seeking an auspicious day, to dig a well in order to quench the
   flames of a house on fire.
   1573. erikiṟa vīṭṭiṟ piṭuṅkukiṟatu lāpam.
   Whatever is abstracted from a burning house is a gain.
   1574. erutiṉ puṇṇiṟkuc cāmpal maruntu.
   Ashes are medicine for the sores of a bull.
   1575. erutukkum taṉ puṇ aḻaṟci kākkaikkum taṉ paci aḻaṟci.
   The buffalo suffers from the smarting of its sores, and the crow that
   picks them suffers from the smarting of hunger.
   1576. erutu koḻuttāl toḻuvattil irātu, paṟaiyaṉ koḻuttāl pāyil irāṉ.
   If an-ox grow fat, it will not remain in a stall; if a Pariah becomes
   rich, he will not sit on a mat.
   1577. erutu nōyai niṉaikkum, kākkai paciyai niṉaikkum.
   The ox feels the pain, the crow its hunger.
   1578. erutu nōy kākkaikkut teriyumā?
   Is a crow aware what pain it occasions when picking the sore of an ox?
   1579. erutu īṉṟatu eṉṟāl tōḻattilē kaṭṭu eṉkiṟatu.
   If it be reported, that the bull has a calf, he will say, O, tie it up
   in the stall.
   1580. erutu keṭṭārkkum eṭṭē kaṭukkāy, iḷampiḷḷaittāyccikkum eṭṭē
   kaṭukkāy.
   Giving eight gall nuts to him who has lost a ball, and eight to a woman
   in the first stage of pregnancy.
   1581. erutu vāṅkumuṉṉē puṉceykku uḻu eṉkiṟāy.
   You bid me plough the dry land before the ox is bought.
   1582. erutu niṉaitta iṭattilē tōḻam kaṭṭukiṟatā ?
   Is its shed put up where the bull may think fit ?
   1583. erutu kōpaṅkoṇṭu paratēcam pōṉatu pōla.
   As a bull went away in a rage to a foreign country.
   1584. erutu maṟaiviṟ pullut tiṉkiṟāyā?
   Dost thou eat grass screened by a bull ?
   1585. erutukku nōy vantāl koṭṭāyaic cuṭukiṟatā?
   Is its shed to be burnt down because the ox is sick ?
   1586. erutum vaṇṭiyum ottāl mēṭu paḷḷam ētu?
   What matters the ruggedness of the road if the bullocks and bandy a
   country cart-hold together?
   1587. erumaikkaṭā eṉṟālum kuḻantaikkup pāl oru pīr illaiyā eṉkiṟāy.
   Though it is a male buffalo, you ask me if there be not a drop of milk
   for the child.
   1588. erumai vāṅkumuṉ ney vilai kūṟukiṟāy.
   You publish the price of ghee before buying a buffalo.
   1589. erumaik kompu naṉaikiṟataṟkumuṉṉē eḻupatu taram maḻai varukiṟatu.
   It will rain seventy times before a buffalo's horns will be wet.
   1590. erumaik kōmayam ekkiyattiṟku ākumā?
   Will the dung of the buffalo serve for sacrificial purposes ?
   1591. erumai māṭṭiṉ mēl maḻai peytatupōla.
   As it rained on a buffalo.
   1592. erumai māṭṭiṉ mēl ettaṉai cūṭu iruntālum teriyātu, pacumāṭṭil oru
   cūṭu iruntālum teriyum.
   Brands on a buffalo however numerous will scarcely appear, but a single
   brand on a cow will be visible.
   1593. erumai iruntallō pāl kaṟakkavēṇṭum?
   We may milk may we not, provided there be a buffalo ?
   1594. erumaiyilum veḷḷāṭu ēṟakkaṟakkumā ?
   Will a goat yield more milk than a buffalo ?
   1595. eruvukkup pōṉavaṉ iḷaiyāḷaik kaippiṭittāṟpōla.
   As he who went in search of manure, seized the hand of a maiden.
   1596. eruvukkup pōṉavaṉ elumiccampaḻam eṭuttatu pōla.
   As he who went to pick up cow-dung, gathered lemons.
   1597. eli ammaṇattōṭē pōkiṉṟatu eṉkiṟāṉ.
   He says that the rat goes naked.
   1598. eli aḻutāl pūṉai viṭumā?
   Will the cat leave its hold on the crying of the rat ?
   1599. eli aḻutu pulampiṉālum pūṉai piṭittatu viṭātu.
   Although the rat may cry and lament, the cat will not relinquish its
   hold.
   1600. eli aṟukkum tūkkamāṭṭātu.
   The rat nibbles the grain, but it does not carry off the basket.
   1601. eli irukkiṟa iṭattil pāmpu irukkum.
   Where there is a rat, there will also be a snake.
   1602. elikkup payantu vīṭṭaic cuṭṭatu pōla.
   Like burning down the house for fear of rats.
   1603. elikkup pirāṇāvastai pūṉaikkuk koṇṭāṭṭam.
   The death-struggle of a rat is the sport of a cat.
   1604. elikku aṉukūlam pāmpu piṭāraṉukku añcutal, eḷiyārkku aṉukūlam
   valiyār irācaṉukku añcutal.
   The snake's fear of him who catches it, is favourable to the rat, when
   the strong fear the king, the weak are benefited.
   1605. elikku maṇiyam cuvarai aṟukkiṟatu tāṉ.
   The business of the rat is to burrow in the wall.
   1606. eṉ talaiyilē kōṭāli viḻuntatu pōla.
   As an axe fell on the head of the rat.
   1607. eli talaiyil kōpuram iṭintu viḻuntāṟpōla.
   As if the tower of the temple should fall on the head of a rat.
   1608. eli pūṉaiyai vellumā?
   Can a rat overcome a cat?
   1609. eli pūṉaikkuc calām paṇṇuvatu pōla.
   As a rat makes salaam to a cat.
   1610. elippiḻukkai iṟappil iruntu eṉṉa, varappil iruntu eṉṉa ?
   What matters it whether the droppings of a rat are in the inside of a
   sloping roof, or on the ridge of a cornfield ?
   1611. eliyum pūṉaiyum pōla irukkiṟatu.
   Living like a rat and a cat.
   1612. eliyum pūṉaiyum iṇaintu viḷaiyāṭiṉatupōla.
   As the rat and the cat united in sport.
   1613. eliyaik kaṇṭu pūṉai ēkkam aṭaiyumā ?
   Will the cat be alarmed at the sight of a rat ?
   1614. eliyaik kaṇṭu pūṉai ēṅki ēṅkik kiṭakkumō?
   Will a cat be greatly alarmed at the sight of a rat?
   1615. elivaḷai āṉālum taṉivaḷai vēṇṭum.
   A separate hole is to be preferred though it be a rat-hole.
   One's own cot is desirable however humble.
   1616. eli vīṭu kaṭṭap pāmpu kuṭikoḷḷum.
   A rat makes the hole, a snake inhabits it.
   1617. elivēṭṭaikkut tavil aṭippārā?
   Do they beat a tomtom when hunting rats?
   1618. elumiccaṅkāykkup puḷi ēṟṟukiṟatu pōla.
   Like infusing acidity into a lemon.
   1619. elumiccañ ceṭikku erup pōṭṭāṟpōla.
   Like manuring a lemon tree.
   1620. elumpu kaṭikkiṟa nāykkup paruppuc cōṟu ēṉ?
   Why give pulse to a dog that gnaws bones ?
   1621. elumpu kaṭikkiṟa nāy irumpu kaṭikkumā?
   Can a dog that gnaws bones bite iron?
   1622. elumpu illā nā ellām pēcum.
   A boneless tongue may say any thing.
   1623. ellām aṟintavaṉum illai, oṉṟum aṟiyātavaṉum illai.
   No one knows everything, nor is any one ignorant of everything.
   1624. ellām irukkiṟatu peṭṭiyilē ilaikkaṟi kaṭaiyac caṭṭi illai.
   Everything wanted is in the box, but there is no chatty in which to
   macerate the vegetable curry.
   1625. ellāt talaiyilum eṭṭu eḻuttu, eṉ talaiyilē pattu eḻuttu.
   On all heads there are eight letters, on mine there are ten.
   1626. ellārukkum collumām palli, tāṉ pōyk kāṭippāṉaiyil viḻumām.
   It is said thut the lizard which uttered prognostications, will go and
   fall into the refuse pan.
   1627. ellā macakamum cāyantarattiṟṟāṉ varukiṟatu.
   It is in the evening that all the mosquitos come.
   1628. ellārukkum caṉi turumpu pōla, eṉakkuc caṉi malaipōla.
   Saturn who is a more straw to all other men, to me is as a mountain.
   1629. ellārum pākku ivaṉ oru tōppu.
   All other men are areca-nuts, but this man is a grove of areca
   trees.
   1630. ellārum taṭukkiṉ kīḻ nuḻaintāl avaṉ kōlattiṉ kīḻ nuḻaivāṉ.
   If all can hide themselves under a small mat, he can conceal himself
   under the ornamental drawing on the floor.
   The kōlam here mentioned is a floor ornament very commonly formed at
   the entrance of a native house : the form is circular. These ornaments
   are renewed every morning. They contain various devices. In some a
   temple car as delineated, in others trees, birds, flowers. They are
   generally striking because the combinations indicate considerable
   skill. It may be that they are connected with the prevalent ideas
   regarding the evil eye.
   1631. ellāt tāṭṭōṭṭum kullāvukkuḷḷē irukkiṟatu.
   All the skill in steering centres in the out-rigger.
   Out-rigger boats or canoes are common on the south western coast of
   Ceylon. They are very swift and most safe. In 1848 when at Colombo duty
   called me daily to a largo ship at the time out in tho offing anchored
   in seven fathoms of water. On the occasion under notice I went on board
   in an ordinary Cingalese out-rigger canoe. In the evening after having
   completed the berths, for my two daughters who were going home for
   education, I betook myself to the boat, and soon after we got clear of
   the ship the boat was struck in the stern, filled, and went down. When
   I emerged from the waves I found myself near one of the two brackets of
   the out-rigger. The canoe was submerged but could not sink lower than
   the ends of the brackets tied to her side. The out-rigger at the other
   end of the brackets was floating on the surface of the sea, the canoe
   being suspended by it like a pair of scales from a beam. Aided by one
   of those brackets, which I pressed to my bosom, and a Chubb's Palanquin
   box, I gained the rocks soon after sunset and escaped to land.
   1632. ellā ōṭṭum kullāvilē.
   All our progress depends on the outrigger.
   1633. ellārum nallārā, kal ellām māṇikkamā?
   Are all men good men, are all stones rubies ?
   1634. ellā vēlaiyum ceyvāṉ, cettāl piḻaikkamāṭṭāṉ.
   He can do all things, but when dead he cannot resuscitate himself.
   1635. ellārum kappal ēṟiyāyiṟṟu iṉi ammāṉār poṟpaṭṭam kaṭṭappōkiṟār.
   All have embarked, my uncle is about to receive a golden mark of
   distinction.
   Spoken of aspirations beyond one's merits.
   1636. ellārum ēṟi iḷaitta kutiraiyil cāstiriyār ēṟic caṟukki viḻuntār.
   On mounting a jadod horse that all had ridden, the astrologer slipped
   and fell down.
   1637. ellām aṟintum, kaḻunīrppāṉaiyil kaiyiṭukiṟatā?
   What, is one who knows all things, to put his hand into filthy water?
   1638. ellai pāḻpaṭṭālum kollaikkaṭamai viṭār.
   Though the landmarks be destroyed, they will not remit the ground-rent.
   1639. evaṉ ākilum tāṉ cāka maruntu uṇpāṉā?
   Will any one takemedicine to poison, himself?
   1640. eḻutāk kaṭaṉukku aḻutāl tīrumā?
   Will crying availfor money lent of which no account has been kept?
   1641. eḻuti vaḻaṅkāṉ vāḻkkai kaḻutai puraṇṭa kaḷam.
   The condition of the man who keeps no accounts is like the place in
   which an ass has rolled itself.
   1642. eḻutiya viti aḻutāl tīrumā?
   Will destiny be averted by weeping ?
   1643. eḻutuvatu arumai eḻutiṉataip paḻutaṟa vācippatu arumai.
   Writing is important, reading correctly what is written, is more so.
   1644. eḻutukiṟatu peritu alla, iṉam aṟintu cērkkiṟatu peritu.
   To be able to write is no great matter; to compose harmoniously is
   great.
   1645. eḻuttu aṟinta vaṇṇāṉ kuṟittu eṟintāṉ ōlai.
   The washerman who had learnt his letters threw away his ola.
   1646. eḻuttu aṟinta maṉṉaṉ kiḻittu eṟintāṉ ōlaiyai.
   The king who had learnt his letters tore and threw away his ola.
   It would appear that the two preceding proverbs relate to personswho
   suppose that ability to read supercedes all records.
   1647. eḻuttukkup pāl māṟiṉa kaṇakkaṉum uṭukkaikkup pālmāṟiṉa tāciyum
   varuttam aṭaivār.
   The curmum who neglects his accounts, and the dancing girl who is
   careless about her dress, will come to grief.
   1648. eḻuntiruppāṉ kāl illai.
   He would rise, but he has no feet.
   1649. eḻupatu ceṉṟālum paṟai ēviṉāṟṟāṉ ceyyum.
   Though seventy years old, a Pariah will do nothing unless he is
   prompted.
   1650. eḻupatu pēraik koṉṟa paṭu nīli .
   A cruel Nili-womam - who killed seventy persons.
   1651. eḻaikkum pēḻaikkum kāṭukāḷ ammai.
   The mother of Vairavi is the patroness of the poor and of boats.
   1652. eḷiyavaḷ piḷḷai āṉālum ceyyum caṭaṅku ceyyavēṇṭum.
   Though the child of a poor woman, the accustomed rites must
   beperformed.
   1653. eḷiyavaṉai aṭittup puḷiyaṅkāy paṟittāṟpōla.
   Like beating a poor man, and plucking his tamarind fruit.
   1654. eḷiyavaṉukkup peṇṭāy irukkiṟatilum valiyavaṉukku aṭimai ākiṟatu
   nallatu.
   It is better to be the slave of the wealthy, than the wife of the
   indigent.
   1655. eḷiyavaṉaik kaṇṭu vāyāl ēykkiṟāṉ.
   Seeing that the man is poor, he deceives him by fair words.
   1656. eḷiyavaṉ peṇṭāṭṭi ellārukkum maittuṉicci.
   The wife of a poor man is sister-in-law to all.
   1657. eḷiyārai valiyār aṭittāl valiyārait teyvam aṭikkum.
   If the powerful oppress the weak, God will punish them in return.
   1658. eḷiyārai etir iṭṭukkoṇṭāl pirāṇhāṉi.
   Inferiors if opposed become mortal enemies.
   1659. eḷ attaṉaiyai malai attaṉai ākkukiṟatu.
   Magnifying a rape seed into a mountain.
   1660. eḷḷukkāy piḷanta vivakāram.
   A dispute as easy to decide as the splitting of a rape seed.
   1661. eḷḷukkāy piḷantāṟpōlap pēcavēṇṭum.
   One ought to speak as evenly as a rape-pod splits.
   1662. eḷḷukkut takka eṇṇey, eḷḷukkut takka piṇṇākku.
   Oil is proportioned to the sessamum, refuse proportioned to the pressed
   seed.
   1663. eḷḷukkup puḷḷi varum ecciṟku eṟumpu varum.
   Birds are attracted by rape seed, ants by leavings.
   1664. eḷḷukkuḷ eṇṇey pōla.
   As oil in sessamum seed.
   1665. eḷḷukkuḷ eṇṇey pōl eṅkum niṟaintirukkum.
   Everywhere present as oil throughout the sesamum seed.
   1666. eḷḷukku ēḻu uḻavu koḷḷukku ōr uḻavu.
   Ploughing seven times for sesamum seed, once for gram.
   1667. eḷḷuttāṉ eṇṇeykku ularukiṟatu, elippiḻukkai eṉṉattukku
   ularukiṟatu?
   Sesamum seed is dried for oil; but why dry rat-dung ?
   1668. eḷḷum paccai ariciyum pōla irukkavēṇṭum.
   It must be as sesamum seed and raw rice.
   1669. eḷḷum karumpum iṟukkiṉāl payaṉ tarum.
   Sesamum seed and sugarcane yield a profit when pressed.
   1670. eḷḷukku ēḻu uḻavu uḻukiṟavēḷai veḷḷāḷar koḷḷukku ōr uḻavu uḻutu
   payircey.
   O, Vellala who ploughest seven times to sow rape-seed, plough once for
   horse-gram and thus cultivate the ground.
   1671. eṟikiṟatu muyalukkup paṭukiṟatu paṟṟaikku.
   Throwing at a hare and hitting a bush.
   1672. eṟivāṉēṉ coṟivāṉēṉ?
   Why throw, why scratch?
   Why provoke a nuisance?
   1673. eṟumpu kaṭikkap poṟukkātā?
   Canst thou not bear the bite of an ant?
   1674. eṟumpiṉ kaṇ ataṉ aḷavukkup peritu; āṉaiyiṉ kaṇataṉ aḷavukkuc
   ciṟitu.
   The eyes of an ant are large in proportion to its size, the eyes of an
   elephant are small for its size.
   1675. eṟumpukkuk koṭṭāṅkaccit taṇṇīr camuttiram.
   A cocoanut shell-full of water is an ocean to an ant.
   1676. eṟumpup puṟṟil pāmpu kuṭi koḷvatu pōla.
   As a snake occupies an ant-hole.
   1677. eṟumpukkum taṉ kaiyāl eṇcāṇ uṭampu.
   Even an ant is eight spans long as measured by its own hand.
   1678. eṟumpu ūrak kal tēyum.
   By the continual creeping of ants a stone will wear away.
   1679. eṟumpiṉ kaṇṇukku erumai mūttiram ēkapperuveḷḷam.
   The urine of the buffalo is as a perfect deluge in the eye of an ant.
   1680. eṟumpu ūrak kal kuḻiyum.
   By the continual creeping of ants a stone will become hollow.
   1681. eṟumpu ūra iṭaṅkoṭuttāl erutum potiyum uḷḷē celuttuvāṉ.
   If room be given sufficient for ants to creep in, he will drivea loaded
   bullock that way.
   1682. eṟumpu eṭuttup pōvataṟkut taṭi eṭuttu niṟkiṟatu, periya
   pūcaṉikkāy pōkiṟatu teriyātā?
   You stand armed with a club to watch that which may be carried away by
   ants, are you unable to see when a large pumpkin hasbeen taken away?
   1683. eṟumpu mutal eṇṇāyiram kōṭikkum teriyum.
   It is known to the eighty thousand millions of creatures from an ant
   upwards.
   1684. eṟumpu muṭṭai koṇṭu tiṭṭai ēṟiṉ maḻai peyyum.
   If ants carry their eggs to a higher place, it will rain.
   1685. eṉakku aṭṭamattuc caṉi.
   With me Saturn is in the eighth sign.
   1686. eṉakku ūṇum illai uṟakkamum illai.
   I have neither food nor sleep.
   1687. eṉatu nāṭkaḷ ellām ūmai kaṇṭa kaṉāppōl āyiṉa.
   My days are like the dream of the dumb.
   1688. eṉ īralaik karukku arivāḷ koṇṭu aṟukkiṟatu.
   It cuts my liver with a sharp sickle.
   1689. eṉ kāriyam ellām nantaṉ paṭaivīṭāyp pōyiṟṟu.
   My affairs are like Nandan's camp.
   The name of a shoemaker who is reputed to have reigned as a kingfor
   three hours, and to have issued leather coin.
   1690. eṉ kuṭi keṭṭatum uṉ kuṭi keṭṭatum poḻutu viṭintāl teriyum.
   It will be knownat day-break whether my family or your's has
   been ruined.
   1691. eṉpait tiṉṟu cataiyaik koṭuttu vaḷarttāḷ.
   Eating bones herself, she has brought up her children on flesh.
   1692. eṉ makaḷ vārattōṭē vāram muḻukuvāḷ, eṉ marumakaṉtīpāvaḷikkut
   tīpāvaḷi muḻukuvāṉ.
   My daughter bathes once a week, my son-in-law bathes at depaveli.
   1693. eṉ marumakaṉukku vēppeṇṇeyām tūkkeṇṇey.
   Superior oil is said tobe Margosa oil to my son-in-law.
   1694. eṉ mukattiṟ karipūciṉāyē.
   Thou hast smeared my face with charcoal.
   1695. eṉ mutukiṉ tōl uṉakkuc ceruppāy irukkum.
   The skin of my back will serve you for shoes.
   1696. eṉ vīṭṭukku vantāl eṉṉa koṇṭu varukiṟāy, uṉ vīṭṭukku vantāl eṉṉa
   koṭukkiṟāy?
   When you come to my house, what do you bring, when I come to
   yours, what do you give ?
   1697. eṉṟum maṟaintiruppatilum etirē pōtal uttamam.
   It is better tocome to the front at once than to be always concealed.
   1698. eṉṟu niṉṟum poṉṟuvar ōr nāḷ.
   No matter how long one may live, the day of death will come.
   1699. eṉṉa coṉṉālum eṉ putti pōkātu.
   Say what you may, I will not change my mind.
   1700. eṉṉaṭā tātā puraṭṭāci mātam muppatum oru kantāyam.
   O! mendicant, the thirty days of September are all days of receipt.
   1701. eṉṉaṭā kuccuk kaṭṭip pēcukiṟāy.
   You fellow, you affect to speak in an elegant style.
   1702. eṉṉamāyc colli itamāy uraittālum kaḻutaikku upatēcam kātil ēṟātu.
   No instruction however explicit or agreeable will enter the ear of an
   ass.
   1703. eṉṉa māyam iṭaicci māyam, mōrōṭu taṇṇīr kalanta māyam.
   What is the deception practised by the dairy maid ? It is mixingwater
   with butter-milk.
   1704. eṉṉaṭā keṭṭuppōkiṟāy eṉṟāl, iṉṉamum keṭṭuppōkiṟēṉ pantayam pōṭu
   eṉkiṟāṉ.
   If one say, fie on thee, thou art destroying thyself, he replies, I
   will take a bet that I will exceed my former course.
   1705. eṉṉa tiṉṟālum ataṟku mēlē nālu pērīccampaḻam tiṉṉa ellām
   aṭipaṭum.
   No matter what may be eaten; if four dates be taken afterwards,the
   whole will be digested.
   1706. eṉṉuṭaiya vīṭṭiṟkup pūvāy varap poṉṉum turumpāccu.
   Since the woman came to my house, even gold has become a common thing.
   1707. eṉṉaippōlak kuralum eṉ akkāḷaippōla oyilum illai eṉkiṟatām
   kaḻutai.
   The ass boasted that there was no voice equal to his, and no gait equal
   to that of his elder sister.
   1708. eṉṉaik kaṇṭāl caṇalukkuḷḷē oḷikkiṟāy, eṉ peṇ cātiyaik kaṇṭāl
   caṭṭikkuḷḷē oḷikkiṟāy.
   On seeing me, thou hidest among the hemp, and on seeing my wife, thou
   hidest in a chatty.
   1709. ēkātacikku mā iṭittāṟpōla.
   Like pounding flour for Ekadasi.
   Ekadasi, the eleventh of December which is observed by the Hindus as a
   fast and therefore the preparation of food is not required. Said of
   something irrelevant.
   1710. ēkātacit tiruṭiyai ēṟṟaṭā ratattil
   O fellow, put the pretended observer of Ekadasi on the car.
   1711. ēkāli vākaṉam poti cumantāṟpōla.
   As a Washerman's vehicle (a donkey) carries its load.
   1712. ēccilum pēccilum vallavaṉē.
   He is indeed clever in abuse and empty talk.
   1713. ēṭā kūṭakkāraṉukku vaḻi eṅkē eṉṟāl, pōkiṟavaṉ talai mēlām.
   If it be asked where is the way for the stubborn, it is replied, on the
   head of the way faring man.
   1714. ēṭu aṟiyātāṉ pīṭu peṟātāṉ.
   The ignorant man is not held in estimation.
   1715. ēṭṭuc curaikkāy kaṟikku ākumā?
   Will the word suraikai a gourd serve as a curry?
   1716. ēṇikkompukku kōṇakkompu pōṭalāmā?
   Is a crooked pole fit for a ladder?
   1717. ēṇaikkaḻikkuk kōṇaṟkaḻi veṭṭukiṟatā?
   Do you cut a crooked stick for a litter?
   1718. ēṇṭā teṉṉamarattil ēṟiṉāy eṉṟāl, kaṉṟukkuṭṭikkup pul piṭuṅka
   eṉṟāṉ.
   You fellow! why did you go up the Cocoanut tree! when thus addressed,
   he replied, I went to get grass for the calf.
   1719. ēṇṭā karuṭā cukamā? irukkiṟa iṭattil iruntāl cukam tāṉ.
   O Garuda, are you well? I should be well enough if I were in the place
   where I ought to be.
   1720. ēṇṭā paṭṭappakalil tiruṭukiṟāy? eṉ avacaram uṉakkut teriyumā ?
   What! do you steal in broad day light? He replies, do you know how
   pressing my necessities are ?
   1721. ēṇṭā puḷiyamarattil ēṟiṉāy? pūṉaikkuṭṭikkup pul paṟikka.
   Why, man, have you got up into the Tamarind tree? he replied, to pluck
   grass for my kitten.
   1722. ēṇṭā muṭiccu aviḻkkiṟāy? eṉpaci uṉakkut teriyumā?
   Why, you fellow, do you untie the knot? Do you know how hungryI am ?
   1723. ēṇṭi ciṟukki pullu āccā? oru noṭikku muṉ kaṭṭāccē.
   Well, my girl, have you cut the grass? she replied, it was tied up
   before one could snap his fingers.
   1724. ēṇṭi peṇṇē cōrntirukkiṟāy? cōṟu pattiyam.
   Why, my girl, do you faint? I have not had rice enough.
   1725. ēṇṭi peṇṇē kuntiyirukkiṟāy? cōṟu paṟṟāmal.
   Why my girl do you squat ? For want of sufficient rice.
   1726. ētu piriyam ? illātatu piriyam.
   What do you wish? That which I have not.
   1727. ētum aṟṟavaṉukku ēṉ iraṇṭu peṇṭāṭṭi?
   Why two wives to one who has nothing?
   1728. ēteṉṟu kēṭpārum illai, eṭuttup piṭippārum illai.
   None to enquire, none to help.
   1729. ēri uṭaikiṟataṟku muṉṉē aṇai pōṭavēṇṭum.
   Before the bund bursts, it must be strengthened.
   1730. ēri niṟaintāl karai kaciyum.
   If the tank be full, its bank will be moist.
   1731. ēri perukil eṅkum perukku.
   When the tank overflows, the flood will spread all around.
   1732. ēri mitantāl iṭaiyaṉai matiyātu.
   If the hunch of the ox grow high, he will not fear his keeper.
   1733. ēriyiṉ nīraik kaṭṭutal aritu uṭaittal eḷitu.
   It is difficult to confine the water of a tank, but easy to break the
   bund.
   1734. ēriyiṉ taṇṇīr itō cūriyatēvā ?
   O divine sun, behold the water of the tank?
   1735. ēriyōṭu pakai koṇṭu cavucam ceyyātirukkiṟatā?
   Do you abstain from ablution because you are dissatisfied with the
   tank?
   1736. ēr uḻukiṟa piḷḷai iḷaittu pōṉāl pōkiṟatu, pariyam pōṭṭa peṇṇaip
   pārttu vaḷar.
   Never mind, should the youth at the plough become lean, take care of
   the girl who has received the nuptial presents.
   1737. ēr piṭittavaṉ eṉṉa ceyvāṉ pāṉai piṭittavaḷ pākkiyam.
   Comfort depends on her who has charge of the cooking pots, not on the
   ploughman.
   1738. ēlavē tolaintatu eṅkaḷait toṭṭa karmam.
   The sin which affected us is already removed.
   1739. ēlēlam! ēlēlam! erumaiccāṇi kāykiṟatu.
   Elelam, Elelam, the buffalo dung is drying.
   The sound elelam is uttered by boatmen and others on the Coromandel
   coast when palling together, as savas is, by boatmen on the Hoogly:
   Some derive it from valikkiṟatu.
   1740. ēlēlaciṅkaṉ poruḷ ēḻu kaṭaliṟ pōṉālum tirumpum.
   The property of Elelasingam, though it pass over seven seas, will
   return.
   Elelasingam a wealthy merchant, the disciple of Tiruvallurar.
   1741. ēvaṟ pēy kūraiyaip piṭuṅkum.
   The excited demon will take off the thatch.
   1742. ēvā makkaḷ mūvā maruntu.
   Children who do their duty unprompted are as a life-preserving remedy.
   1743. ēvukiṟavaṉukku vāyccol, ceykiṟavaṉukkut talaiccumai.
   To the taskmaster a word, to the servant a burden on the head.
   1744. ēḻai aḻuta kaṇṇīr kūriyavāḷai okkum.
   The tears of the poor are as sharp swords.
   1745. ēḻai pākkut tiṉṉa eṭṭu vīṭu aṟiyavēṇṭumā?
   Because the poor man uses betel-nut, is it to be made known at eight
   houses?
   1746. ēḻai pēccu araṇmaṉaikku ēṟumā?
   Will the speech of the poor go up to the palace ?
   1747. ēḻaip piḷḷaikkut teyvamē tuṇai.
   God is the helper of the helpless child.
   1748. ēḻaip piḷḷaikku evarkaḷum tuṇai.
   Every one is a helper to a helpless child.
   1749. ēḻaiyaik kaṇṭāl mōḻaiyum pāyum.
   Even a beast without horns will attack the poor.
   1750. ēṟac coṉṉāl erutukkuk kōpam, iṟaṅkac coṉṉāl noṇṭikkuk kōpam.
   When told to mount, the bull is angry, when told to dismount, the lame
   man is dissatisfied.
   1751. ēṟappaṭāta marattilē eṇṇappaṭāta māṅkāy.
   Innumerable mangoes on a tree no one can climb.
   1752. ēṟa viṭṭu ēṇiyai vāṅkukiṟatā?
   What ! remove the ladder after allowing one to mount ?
   1753. ēṟiṉa kompāl iṟaṅka vēṇṭum.
   One must come down on the branch by which he ascended.
   1754. ēṟukiṟa kutiraiyilum uḻavumāṭu atika uttamam.
   A plough bull is superior to a saddle horse.
   1755. ēṟu neṟṟi cūṟutalai etirkka vantāl ākātu.
   It is a bad omen to meet one with a high forehead or curly hair.
   1756. ēṟumāṟāyp pēcukiṟatā?
   What, is it to speak at random?
   1757. ēṟum tēmal iṟaṅkum paṭartāmarai kūṭum puruvam kuṭiyaik keṭukkum.
   Ascending cutaneous spots, descending ring-worm and eyebrows contiguous
   are ominous.
   1758. ēṟkavē māmi pēykkōlam atilum koñcam mākkōlam.
   The mother-in-law is frightfully ugly already, and the flour on her
   face makes her more so.
   1759. ēṟkaṉavē varukiṟa vikkiṉaṅkaḷait taṭukkavēṇṭum.
   Approaching evils should be provided against in due time.
   1760. ēṟṟakkōlukkup piṭittāl arivāṭpiṭikku varum.
   If you measure sufficient for a well-bucket pole, it may suffice for
   the handle of a sickle.
   1761. ēṟṟappāṭṭukku etirppāṭṭā?
   Is the song of the picotta responsive?
   1762. ēṉ koḻukkaṭṭai cavukkiṭṭāy? oru kācu vellam illāmaṟcavukkiṭṭēṉ !
   Cake! why so insipid? Because I lack a cash-worth of sugar.
   1763. aiṅkalak kappiyil naḻuviṉa kappi ivaṉ.
   He is a broken grain fallen out of five kalams.
   One of a large number of insignificant persons.
   1764. aiṅkātam pōṉālum akappē araikkācu kiṭaiyātē.
   Though you may go fifty miles, you will not fetch half a cash.
   1765. aiṅkātam pōṉālum, akappai araikkācu.
   Although it may go fifty miles, an agappai will fetch but half a cash.
   1766. aiṅkātam pōṉālum aṟimukam vēṇṭum.
   Though one goes fifty miles off, an acquaintance is needed.
   1767. aiṅkātam pōṉālum, taṉ pāvam taṉṉōṭē.
   Though he may go fifty miles, his own sin will still cleave to him.
   1768. aiṅkāyam iṭṭa kāram iṭṭālum taṉ nāṟṟam pōkātāmpēyccuraikkāykku.
   Though cooked with five ingredients, the wild gourd will not lose its
   odour.
   1769. aitatu nel, aṭarnta tu cuṟṟam.
   In rice plants, distance is required, in kindred, closeness.
   1770. aintu ciṭṭukku iraṇṭu kācu vilai.
   The price of five chits a small bird is two cash.
   1771. aippaci mātam aḻukait tūṟal kārttikai mātam kaṉa maḻai.
   In October drizzling, in November heavy rain.
   1772. aippaci mātattu veyyalil aṉṟu uritta tōl aṉṟu kāyum.
   In the sunshine of October a skin dries the day it is stript off.
   1773. aippacikkum kārttikaikkum maḻai illāviṭṭāl aṇṇaṉukkum cari
   tampikkum cari.
   If the rains of October and November fail, the elder and younger
   brother will be on a par.
   1774. aippaci mātattu erumaikkaṭāvum mārkaḻi mātattu nampiyāṉum cari.
   A buffalo in the month of October and a Vaishnava brahman in December
   are alike.
   1775. aimpatilē aṟivu, aṟupatilē aṭakkam, aṟupatukku mēl oṉṟumillai.
   At fifty discrimination, at sixty moderation, after sixty no
   distinguishing characteristic.
   1776. aimpatu vayatāṉavaṉukku aintu vayatup peṇṇā ?
   Is a girl of five fit to be the wife to a man of fifty ?
   1777. aiyaṅkārum tottuk koṭuppār.
   Even the Aiyangar may communicate contagious disease.
   1778. aiyappaṭṭāl paiya naṭa.
   If in doubt, advance slowly.
   1779. aiyappaṉ kutiraiyai vaiyāḷi viṭṭa katai.
   Like the story of one who rode Aiyanar's horse.
   1780. aiyamāṉa kāriyattaic ceyyal ākātu.
   To do a doubtful thing is bad.
   1781. aiyam ēṟṟum aṟivē ōtu.
   Though reduced to beggary, learn to be wise.
   1782. aiyar eṉpavar tuyyar āvar.
   T'hose who are entitled to be called brahmans are holy.
   1783. aiyar varukiṟavaraiyil amāvāciyai niṟkumā ?
   Will the new moon await the brahman's arrival ?
   1784. aiyar katir pōla ammāḷ kutir pōla.
   The husband is like an ear of corn, the wife is like a rice bin or
   grain receptacle.
   1785. aiyaṉār paṭaiyiṟ kuyavaṉār paṭṭatu pōla.
   As the potter perished in the army of Aiyanar.
   1786 aiyaṉār kōvil ceṅkal attaṉaiyum teyvam.
   The bricks of Aiyanar's temple are so many gods.
   1787. aiyaṉār kōvil maṇṇai mitittavar attaṉaiyum piṭāri.
   Those who have trodden the ground of Aiyanar's temple are so many
   Pidaris.
   1788. aiyaṉārē vārum kaṭāvaik kaikkoḷḷum.
   Come, Aiyanar, and accept a goat, a sacrifice.
   1789. aiyaṉ amaippai ārālum taḷḷakkūṭātu.
   No one may dispute the pre-ordination of god.
   1790. aiyō eṉṟāl ivaṉukku āṟu mācattup pāvam cuṟṟum.
   The man who expresses commiseration for him will incur six months sin.
   1791. okkap piṟanta taṅkai ōlamiṭṭu aḻaccē oppārit taṅkaikkuc
   ciṟṟāṭaiyām?
   When one's sister is weeping for a cloth, is it to be given to a woman
   who resembles her?
   1792. occiyam illāta ūrilē peṇ vāṅkiṉa katai.
   The story of a man taking a girl to wife in a village inhabited by the
   shameless.
   1793. oṭinta kōl āṉālum ūṉṟukōl irukkavēṇṭum.
   Though a broken one, a walking stick is necessary.
   1794. oṭṭikkoṇṭu vantum taṭṭik kaḻikkiṟāṉ.
   Though I cling to him, he repels me.
   1795. oṭṭiṉāl toṭṭilum koḷḷum oṭṭāviṭṭāl kaṭṭilum koḷḷātu.
   If compressed the crib will hold it, but if not even a bedstead will
   not contain it.
   1796. oṭṭiṉālum uḻakkuppīrc ceṉkiṟatā?
   Is it to say draw one ulak of milk though the animal is lean ?
   1797. oṭṭaikkup paḷuvu ēṟṟukiṟatu pōla.
   As a camel is loaded.
   1798. oti peruttut tūṇāmā?
   Though the odina tree grow large, will it do for a pillar ?
   1799. oti peruttāl uralāmā?
   Though the odina tree grow large, will it serve for a mortar ?
   1800. oti peruttu eṉṉa, upakāram illātavaṉ vāḻntu eṉṉa ?
   What avails the growth of an odina tree? Of what use is the prosperity
   of the ungenerous ?
   1801. otiyamaram tūṇāmō? ōṭṭāṅkiḷiñcil kācāmō?
   Will an odina tree do for a pillar? will a broken oyster-shell pass as
   a coin?
   1802. otiyamaramum oru camayattukku utavum.
   Even an odina tree may prove useful on an emergency.
   1803. oyyārak koṇṭaiyām tāḻampūvām uḷḷē mēyumām īrum pēṉum.
   Her tresses are graceful and ornamented with the flowers of the screw
   pine, but nits and lice breed therein.
   1804. oru uṟaiyilē iraṇṭu kattiyā?
   Are two swords contained in one sheath?
   1805. oru ūrukku oru vaḻiyā ?
   Is there but one way to a village?
   1806. oru kaṭṭu vaikkōlait taṇṇīril pōṭṭu eṭṭu āḷ kūṭi iḻuttāṟpōla.
   As a bundle of straw that had been dipped in water was dragged along by
   eight persons.
   1807. oru kampattil iraṇṭu āṉai kaṭṭukiṟatā?
   What, to tie two elephants to one pole?
   1808. oru kācu akappaṭukiṟatu kutiraik kompu.
   To earn one cash is as difficult as to find a horse with horns.
   1809. oru kācu pēṇiṉ iru kācu tēṟum.
   One cash saved is two cash got.
   1810. orukāṟ ceytavaṉ irukāṟ ceyvāṉ.
   He who has done a thing once, may do it again.
   1811. oru kācu koṭātavaṉ oru varākaṉ koṭuppāṉā?
   Will he who refuses to give acash, give a pagoda?
   A Pagoda is a gold coin worth about seven shillings.
   1812. oru kācu eṉṟa iṭattil aḻukiṟāṉ.
   He weeps when the word money is uttered.
   1813 orukuṭam pālukku oru tuḷi purai.
   Onedrop of butter-milk to a pot of milk.
   1814. oru kuṇṭilē kōṭṭai piṭikkalāmā?
   Cana fort be taken with one ball ?
   1815. oru kuḷattiṟ piṟanta tāmaraiyum alliyum orē taṉmaiyuṭaiyatalla
   atu pōla oru tāyiṉ vayiṟṟil piṟantacakōtarar iruppārkaḷ.
   The lotus flowers of a tank are not all of the same species, so the
   children of the same mother are not all alike.
   1816.oru kūṭu muṭaintavaṉ oṉpatu kūṭu muṭaivāṉ.
   He who has plaţted one basket may plat nine.
   1817. oru kūṭai kallum teyvamāṉāl, kumpiṭukiṟatu entakkallai ?
   If all the stones in a basket be gods, which shall I worship?
   1818. oru kai taṭṭiṉāl ōcai eḻumpumā?
   Can clapping be effected by one hand?
   1819. oru kai taṭṭiṉāl ōcai eḻumpumā, irukai taṭṭiṉāl ōcai eḻumpumā?
   Can clapping be affected with one, or with both hands?
   1820. oru kai muḻam pōṭumā ?
   Can cubits be measured with only one arm ?
   1821. oru kōpam vantu kiṇaṟṟil viḻuntāl āyiram cantōṣam vantālum
   eḻumpalāmā?
   When one has fallen into a well, in a fit of anger, will a thousand
   joyous considerations help him out ?
   1822. oru caṭṭiyilē iraṇṭu tailam.
   Two kinds of oil in one chatty.
   1823. oru cantippāṉai nāy aṟiyātu.
   A dog does not know the vessels used on fast-days.
   Separate vessels are kept for special occasions, and also for different
   purposes on ordinary days, as for boiling milk &c.
   1824. oru cāṇ kāṭṭilē oru muḻattaṭi veṭṭalāmā?
   Can a stick a cubit long be cut in a grove a span high?
   1825. oru taram viḻuntāl teriyātā ?
   Having fallen once are you not wiser ?
   1826. orutalai vaḻakku nūlilum cevvai .
   An ex parte statement is straighter than a line.
   1827. oru talaikku iraṇṭu ākkiṉaiyā?
   Are there two punishments for one head?
   1828. oru tāy aṟṟa piḷḷaikku ūrellām tāy.
   The whole village is mother to the motherless.
   1829. oru naṉṟi ceytavarai uḷḷa aḷavum niṉai.
   Think of those who have done you even one favour as long as you live.
   1830. oru nāṭ kūttukkut talaiyaic ciraittatu pōl.
   Like shaving the head for a single day's dance.
   1831. oru nāḷaikku ikaḻcci oru nāḷaikkup pukaḻcci.
   One day blame, another day praise.
   1832. oru nāḷaikku iṟakkiṟatu kōṭi piṟakkiṟatu kōṭi.
   Ten millions are born, and ten millions die, daily.
   1833. oru nāḷum cirikkātavaṉ tirunāḷilē cirittāṉ, tirunāḷum
   veṟunāḷāyiṟṟu.
   A man who had never laughed before, laughed on a festival day,
   consequently it became a common day.
   1834. oru nāḷākilum tirunāḷ.
   Although only one day, it is a festival day.
   1835. oru paṉai iraṇṭu pāḷai oṉṟu nuṅku oṉṟu kaḷḷu.
   One palmyra has two spathes, one yields fruit, the other toddy.
   1836. oru pāṉaic cōṟṟukku oṉṟē mātiri.
   One grain suffices to test a whole pot of boiled rice.
   1837. oru piḷḷai peṟṟavaḷukku uṟiyilē cōṟu, nālu piḷḷai
   peṟṟavaḷukku naṭutteruvilē cōṟu.
   The rice for a woman who has borne one child, is on the swinging tray,
   that of the woman who has borne four, is in the middle of the street.
   1838. oru piḷḷaiyeṉṟu ūṭṭi vaḷarttāḷām, atu ceriyāk kuṇam piṭittuc
   cettatām.
   It is said that having only one child she fed it well, but that it died
   of indigestion.
   1839. oru puttiraṉ āṉālum kuru puttiraṉ āvāṉā?
   Although he is an only son, will he become an obedient disciple?
   1840. oru poruḷ ākilum eḻuti aṟi.
   Though only one item, note it.
   1841. oru marattup paḻamā orumikka?
   What! did one tree yield all this fruit ?
   1842. oru marattup paṭṭai oru marattilē oṭṭumā?
   Will the bark of one tree stick to another ?
   1843. oru marattuk kompu oru marattil oṭṭātu.
   The branch of one tree will not stick to another.
   1844. oru maṉappaṭu, ōtuvārkku utavu.
   Besingle-minded, assist those that teach the Vedas.
   1845. oru miḷakukku āṟṟaik kaṭṭi iṟaitta ceṭṭi.
   A merchant who dammed up and drained a river to recover a grain of
   pepper.
   1846. oru miḷakum nālu uppum pōtum.
   Onegrainof pepper and four grains of salt will suffice.
   1847. oru muḻukkilē maṇ eṭukkiṟatā ?
   Whạt ! is it to take up the soil by diving once?
   1848.orumaippāṭu illāta kuṭi orumikkak keṭum.
   A family divided against itself will perish together.
   1849. oruvaṉ aṟintāl ulakam aṟiyum.
   If known to one, the world may know it.
   1850. oruvaṉ aṟinta rakaciyam ulakattil paravum.
   A secret known to one may spread through the world.
   1851. oruvaṉukku iruvar tuṇai oruvaṉai aṟiya iruvar vēṉṭum.
   Two men may help one, two are necessary that one may be known.
   1852. oruvarum aṟiyāta uccitanāmaṉ.
   One of illustrious name unknown to any.
   1853.oruvaṉaik koṉṟavaṉ uṭaṉē cāvāṉ. pala pēraik koṉṟavaṉ paṭṭam
   āḷuvāṉ.
   He who, kills one person immediately suffers death, hewho kills many is
   rewarded with a crown.
   1854. oruvaṉāyp piṟappatu oru piṟappāmā, oṉṟi maram tōppāmā?
   Is it worth being to be an only offspring ? Is a single tree a tope a
   grove ?
   1855.oruvaṉ talaiyil māṇikkam, irukkiṟateṉṟu veṭṭalāmā?
   May you cut-off a man's head because there is a ruby in it?
   1856. oruvaṉāyp piṟantāl taṉimai, iruvarāyp piṟantār pakaimai.
   When only one is born there is loneliness, when two enmity.
   1857. oruvar aṟintāl irakaciyam iruvar aṟintāl parāciyam.
   If known to one only it is a secret, if to two it is public.
   1858. oruvaṉaip paṟṟi ōrakattiru.
   Attach yourself to one person, and dwell in one house.
   1859. oru viral noṭi iṭātu.
   A single finger cannot snap.
   1860. ovvāk kūṭṭilum taṉimai aḻaku, ovvāp pēccu vacaiyōṭu okkum.
   Solitude is preferable to disagreeable society, an unpleasant
   expression may be felt as a reproach.
   1861. oḻukāta vīṭu uḷḷaṅkai attaṉai pōtum.
   If only as large as the palm of the hand a house that does not leak
   will suffice.
   1862. oḻukkam uyar kulattil naṉṟu.
   Virtue is superior to rank.
   1863. oḻukku vīṭṭilē veḷḷam vantatu pōl.
   As a flood came into a leaky house.
   1864. oḻukkukku vaitta caṭṭipōla.
   As a chatty placed under a leak.
   1865. oḻuṅku oru paṇam caḷukku mukkāṟ paṇam.
   Propriety is worth a fanam, pride, three fourths of a fanam.
   1866. oḷikkum cēvakaṉukku mukattil ēṉ mīcai?
   Of what use is a mustache to a sneaking soldier?
   1867. oḷikkap pōyum talaiyāri vīṭṭilā?
   When trying to conceal one's self, is it fit to do so in the house of
   the chief ?
   1868. oḷikkap pōyum iṭam iṭaiñcalā?
   Is the place too narrowfor one who has gone to hide himself?
   1869. oḷḷiyar teḷḷiyar āyiṉum ūḻviṉai paiya nuḻaintu viṭum.
   However enlightened and clear-headed one may be, his destiny will
   quietly creep in.
   1870. oṟṟiyum cītaṉamum paṟṟi āḷavēṇṭum.
   Property received under mortgage, or as a dowry, must be taken into
   immediate possession.
   1871. oṉṟa vanta pēy ūraik keṭuttatu pōl.
   As the demon that came for shelter destroyed the village.
   1872.oṉṟa vanta kākam uram peṟṟāṟpōla.
   As if a crow that came for shelter was strengthened in his position.
   1873. oṉṟa vanta piṭāri ūrp piṭāriyai ōṭṭiṉatu pōl.
   As a demoness that came for shelter drove away the demoness of the
   village.
   1874. oṉṟa vanta piṭāri ūrp piṭāri āṉatupōla.
   As a demoness that came for shelter became the demoness of the village.
   1875. oṉṟāṉa pirapu uṟaṅkik kiṭaikkaiyil piccaikku
   vantavaṉtattiyōtaṉattiṟku aḻukiṟāṉām.
   It is said that whilst a peerless nobleman was lying hungry and
   exhausted, a beggar cries for rice and curds.
   1876. oṉṟāl oṉṟu kuṟai illai, muṉṉālē kaṭṭat tuṇi illai.
   Not a single want, yet no cloth to put on.
   1877. oṉṟu niṉaikka oṉṟāyiṟṟu.
   One thing meditated, another effected.
   1878. oṉṟum aṟiyāḷām kaṉṉi avaḷaip piṭittatām caṉṉi.
   It is said that the virgin is innocent, and is seized with lock-jaw.
   1879. oṉṟu terintavaṉukku ellām teriyātu.
   He who knows one thing does not know all things.
   1880. oṉṟum illaiyeṉṟu ūtiṉāṉ atu tāṉum illaiyeṉṟu koṭṭiṉāṉ.
   He blew a conch to report that there was nothing; and beat a drum to
   intimate that there was not even that.
   1881. oṉṟum aṟṟavaṉukku oṉpatu peṇṭāṭṭi.
   Nine wives to him who has nothing.
   1882. oṉṟum aṟṟa taṅkāḷukku oṉpatu nāḷ caṭṭaṅkaḷ?
   Is a ceremony of nine days to be performed for a destitute woman?
   1883. oṉṟē kutirai oṉṟē rāvuttaṉ.
   One horse, one horseman.
   1884. oṉṟē rājā oṉṟē kutirai.
   One king, one horse.
   1885. oṉṟaip peṟṟāl naṉṟē peṟavēṇṭum.
   If one thing only be obtained, it ought to be good.
   1886. oṉṟaip piṭittāl cātikka vēṇṭum.
   The thing asserted must be maintained.
   1887. oṉṟaip peṟṟālum kaṭukkap peṟu.
   Though you get only one thing, get it quickly.
   1888. oṉṟaip peṟṟālum kaṉṟaip peṟu.
   If you get only one as your hire, take a calf.
   1889. oṉṟait toṭiṉum naṉṟait toṭu.
   Though you touch but one thing, touch what is good.
   Most likely referring to the choice of a wife.
   1890. ō koṭuppāṉukku vāḻkkaip paṭṭu ōṭṭam oḻiya, naṭai illai.
   Having become the wife of the wretch, I am compelled to run instead of
   walking.
   1891. ōṅkil aṟiyum uyar kaṭaliṉ āḻam, pāṅki aṟivāḷ taṉ pattāviṉ
   valimai.
   An onkil fish knows the depth of the ocean, a wife knows her husband's
   strength.
   1892. ōcai kāṭṭip pūcai cey.
   Ring the bell, and perform puja.
   1893. ocai peṟum veṇkalam, ōcaipeṟā maṭkalam.
   Sounding brass, a soundless earthen vessel.
   1894. ōṭam viṭṭu iṟaṅkiṉāl ōṭakkāraṉukku oru coṭṭu.
   On landing, a cuff for the boatman.
   1895. ōṭam viṭṭa āṟum aṭi cuṭum.
   Even a navigable river may burn the feet when dry.
   1896. ōṭam kaṭṭiṉa tūlam.
   A block of wood to which a boat is moored.
   1897. ōṭam kaṭantāl ōṭakkāraṉukku oru coṭṭu.
   After crossing, a cuff for the boatman.
   1898. ōṭam vaṇṭiyilum vaṇṭi ōṭattilum kāṇavumpaṭum.
   A boat may be sesen in a cart, and a cart in a boat.
   1899. ōṭam viṭṭa iṭam aṭi cuṭum aṭi cuṭṭa iṭam ōṭam viṭappaṭum.
   The foot may be burnt in a navigable river, and a boat may float where
   the foot was burnt.
   1900. ōṭavum māṭṭāṉ piṭikkavum māṭṭāṉ, ōyāmal pēcuvāṉ.
   He can neither run nor overtake, but he can talk continually.
   1901. ōṭavum māṭṭēṉ piṭikkavum māṭṭēṉ.
   I can neither run nor catch.
   1902. ōṭi oru kōṭi tēṭuvatilum iruntu oru kācu tēṭuvatu nalam.
   It is better to acquire a cash in quiet than a lak by running about.
   1903. ōṭi oṉpatu paṇam campātippatilum uṭkāntiruntu oru paṇam
   campātippatu naṉṟu.
   Better earn one fanam where you are, thannine fanams by running hither
   and thither.
   1904. ōṭi ōṭi uḷḷaṅkālum veḷuttatu.
   The sole of the foot has become white by constant running.
   1905. ōṭippōṉa puruṣaṉ vantu kūṭikkoṇṭāṉ, uṭaimaimēl uṭaimai pōṭṭu
   miṉukkik koṇṭāḷ.
   The husband that ran away has returned and is reconciled, therefore she
   has adorned herself with jewels to excess.
   1906. ōṭippōṉa ūril ātarittavaṉ kavuṇṭaṉ.
   He who entertained the man that fled from his own village was a
   Koundan-a man of that tribe.
   1907. ōṭippōkiṟavaṉ pāṭip pōkiṟāṉ.
   He who is running away, does so singing.
   1908. ōṭiya muyal periya muyal allavō?
   The hare that ran away was a large one, was it not ?
   1909. ōṭiyam ākilum ūṭuruvak kēḷ.
   Though it is obscene, hear it out.
   1910. ōṭiyum kiḻavikkup piṟakēyā?
   Having set out to run will it do for him to be behind an old Woman?
   1911. ōṭukiṟa pāmpaip piṭikkiṟa paruvam.
   Old enough to seize a running snake.
   1912. ōṭukiṟavaṉaik kaṇṭāl turattukiṟavaṉukku ilēcu.
   Seeing him who retreats, makes the efforts of his pursuer easy.
   1913. ōṭukiṟa veḷḷam aṇaiyil niṟkumā?
   Will a rolling flood stay at the anicut?
   1914. ōṭṭaic caṭṭi āṉālum koḻukkaṭṭai ventāṟ cari.
   The chatty may be cracked, what matters that if it bakes the cakes.
   1915. ōṭṭai nāḻikkup pūṇ kaṭṭiṉatu pōla.
   Like adorning a cracked measure with a metal rim.
   1916. ōṭṭaip pāṉaiyilē carkkarai irukkum.
   A cracked pot will hold sugar.
   1917. ōṭṭaip pāṉaic carkkarai kacakkumā?
   Will sugar, because put in a cracked pot, taste bitter?
   1918. ōṭṭai maṇi āṉālum ōcai nīṅkumā ?
   Though the bell may be cracked will it be void of sound ?
   1919. ōṇāṉ viḻuṅkiya katai pōla.
   Like the story relating to the swallowing of a bloodsucker.
   1920. ōtātārkku illai uṇarvoṭu oḻukkam.
   The unlettered have neither good sense nor virtue.
   1921. ōtuvaṉ ellām uḻuvāṉ talaikkaṭaiyil.
   All poets may be found at the entrance of the ploughman's house.
   1922. ōtuvāṉukku ūrum uḻuvāṉukku nilamum illaiyā?
   Has the poet no country, has the ploughman no land?
   1923. ōtuvārkku utavu.
   Assist instructors-the brahmans.
   1924. ōnti vēlikku iḻukkiṉṟatu, tavaḷai taṇṇīrukku iḻukkiṉṟatu.
   The blood-sucker draws its prey to a hedge, the frog to water.
   1925. ōmapiṇṭattai nāy iccittāṟpōlē.
   As if a dog longed for consecrated food.
   Spoken by Sita to Ravana.
   1926. ōyā maḻaiyum oḻiyāk kāṟṟum.
   Continual rain, and ceaseless wind.
   1927. ōyvilā nēcamē yōlamē caraṇam.
   Thou, the object my unceasing love, take me under thy protection.
   1928. ōram coṉṉavaṉ ārukku āvāṉ?
   Will any employ a person who is given to one-sided statements ?
   1929. ōram coṉṉavaṉ kuṭittaṉam pōlē.
   Like the family of him who makes partial statements.
   1930. ōr āṇṭi pacittirukka ulakam ellām kiṟukiṟeṉṟu cuṟṟukiṟatā?
   Is the whole world so giddy through famine as to allow a religious
   mendicant to suffer from hunger?
   1931. ōr āṟu tāṇṭa māṭṭātavaṉ oṉpatu āṟu tāṇṭuvāṉā?
   Will he who cannot cross one river, cross nine?
   1932. ōr ūrukkup pēccu maṟṟōr ūrukku ēccu.
   That which is polite in one country may be abusive in another.
   1933. ōr ūrukku oru pēriṭṭuk koḷḷalāmā?
   May one assume a different name in every village?
   1934. oḷavai collukku accam illai.
   No fear about Avvai's sayings.
   1935. oḷavaiyārmēlum kuṟṟam uṇṭu aṇṇāviyārmēlum paḻu tu uṇṭu. Even
   Avvai may be charged with blame, a religious teacher also may have his
   defects.
   1936. kaṅkaiyilē muḷaittālum pēyccurai nalla curai āmā ?
   Will a wild gourd become a good gourd by growing on the Ganges ?
   1937. kaṅkaiyil mūḻkiṉālum kākkai aṉṉam ākumā?
   Will a crow become a swan by bathing in the Ganges?
   1938. kaṅkaiyil āṭiṉālum, kaṇamum viṭāmaṟ ceyta pāvam tīrātu.
   Though you wash in the Ganges, sin repeated again and again will not be
   expiated.
   1939. kaṅkaiyil āṭiṉālum pāvam tīrumā?
   Will sin be expiated by bathing in the Ganges ?
   1940. kaṅkaiyilē paṭintālum pēyccuraikkāy nalla curaikkāy ākātu.
   Though a wild gourd be dipped in the Ganges, its inferiority will
   remain.
   1941. kaṅkaiyilē piṟanta nattai cālakkirāmam ākātu.
   A snail of the Ganges is not a Shalgram.
   The Shalgram is a flinty stone, containing the impression of one or
   more ammonitae, supposed by the Hindus to represent Vishnu.
   1942. kacakki mōralāmā?
   Can the fragrance of a flower be appreciated after bruising it?
   1943. kacaṭarukku illaik kaṟṟōr uṟavu.
   The base do not enjoy the friendship of the learned.
   1944. kacaṭaṟak kallārkku icai uṟal illai.
   Persons of imperfect learning have no reputation.
   1945. kacaṭāṉa kalviyiṉum kalviyīṉam nalam.
   Ignorance is better than imperfect knowledge.
   1946. kacintu vantavaṉ kaṇṇait tuṭai.
   Wipe off the tears of him who comes weeping.
   1947. kaccaṟ karuvāṭu mōṭcattiṟkup pōṉālum, piccaikkārar mōṭcattiṟkup
   pōkamāṭṭārkaḷ.
   Though dried fish may attain final emancipation-heaven-beggars cannot.
   1948. kañci varatappā eṉṟāl, eṅkē varatappā eṉkiṟāṉ.
   If I say, O Varathappa give me some kanji, he replies, O Varathappa
   where.
   1949. kaṭalilē ēṟṟam pōṭṭa katai.
   The story relating to a picotta on the sea-side.
   1950. kaṭalil iṭṭa peruṅkāyam pōla.
   Like assafoetida cast into the ocean.
   1951. kaṭalilē turumpu kiṭantālum maṉatilē oru col kiṭavātu.
   A rush may remain in the sea, but a secret will not remain in the mind.
   1952. kaṭalil karaitta puḷipōla.
   Like tamarind acid dissolved in the sea.
   1953. kaṭalait tūrttum kāriyam muṭikka vēṇṭum.
   You must accomplish your undertaking, though you my have to fill up the
   ocean.
   1954. kaṭalait tūrttālum kāriyam muṭiyātu.
   Though the sea be filled up, the thing cannot be effected.
   1955, kaṭal kotittāl viḷāva nīr eṅkē ?
   Should the sea boil, whence water to cool it?
   1956. kaṭal nīr niṟaintu āvatu eṉṉa, kāñcirai paḻuttu āvatu eṉṉa ?
   What benefit arises from the water of the ocean, what good comes
   from the ripening of the kanjirai, strychnos nux vomica, fruit ?
   1957. kaṭal tāṇṭa ācai uṇṭu, kālvāy tāṇṭak kāl illai.
   He wishes to cross the ocean, but has no feet to cross a small drain.
   1958. kaṭal mīṉukku nuḷaiyaṉ iṭṭatē caṭṭam.
   As regards the fish of the sea, whatever name the fisherman givesis
   final.
   1959. kaṭal vaṟṟik karuvāṭu tiṉṉalāmeṉṟu uṭal vaṟṟic cettatām kokku.
   It is said that the stork died while waiting for the ocean to dry, in
   the hope of getting a supply of dried fish.
   1960. kaṭal perukiṉāl karaiyum perukumā?
   Will the shore extend when the sea flows?
   1961. kaṭal perukiṉāl karai ētu?
   What avails the shore when the sea flows ?
   1962. kaṭaṟ karait tāḻaṅkāy kīḻ toṅki eṉṉa mēl toṅki eṉṉa ?
   What matters it whether the wild pine fruit on the sea-shore hangs high
   or low?
   1963. kaṭaṉōṭu kaṭaṉ kantap poṭi kāṟpaṇam.
   Though my debt be increased, let me have a quarter of a fanam worth
   more of fragrant powder.
   1964. kaṭaṉ illāta kañci kāl vayiṟu.
   One fourth supply of kanji for the stomach is better than debt.
   1965. kaṭaṉkāraṉukkuk kaṭaṉum, uṭaṉ piṟantāṉukkup paṅkum
   koṭukka vēṇṭum.
   One must pay one's creditor and give to a relation the portion due to
   him.
   1966. kaṭaṉ vāṅkik kaṭaṉ koṭuttavaṉum keṭṭāṉ ; maram ēṟik kai
   viṭṭavaṉum keṭṭāṉ .
   He who borrowed to lend was ruined; and he who let go his hold of the
   tree he had climbed also perished.
   1967. kaṭaṉ vāṅkiyum paṭṭiṉi kalyāṇam paṇṇiyum canniyāci .
   Famished though he has borrowed, an ascetic though he is wedded.
   1968. kaṭaṉ vāṅkiyum paṭṭiṉiyā!
   What to famish after having borrowed money!
   1969. kaṭaṉkāraṉukkuk kaṭaṉum paḻikāraṉukkup paḻiyum koṭukka vēṇṭum.
   Debt to the creditor and retaliation to the wrong-doer are due.
   1970. kaṭaṉkāraṉai vaikkak kaḻu uṇṭā ?
   Is there a stake for impaling debtors ?
   1971. kaṭaṉ paṭṭār neñcam pōṟ kalaṅkiṉāṉ.
   He was as disquieted as the mind of a debtor.
   1972. kaṭā kaṭā eṉṟālum maruntukku oru pīr eṉkiṟāṉ.
   Though informed that it is a he-goat, he persists in asking a drop of
   milk for a medicinal purpose.
   1973. kaṭā piṉvāṅkukiṟatu pāyccalukku aṭaiyāḷam.
   The drawing back of the he-goat shows that he is about to butt.
   1974. kaṭā mēykkiṟavaṉ aṟivāṉō koḻup pōṉaviṭam.
   Does the cowherd know where the ploughshare has passed?
   1975. kaṭāviṉ cantiṟ pullait tiṉkiṟatu pōla.
   Like eating grass screened behind a bull.
   1976. kaṭāvum kaṭāvum caṇṭai pōṭukiṟapōtu uṇṇi nacuṅkiṉāṟpōla.
   As the tick was crushed to death when the goats fought.
   1977. kaṭikōlilē kaṭṭiṉa nāy.
   A dog tied to a stick.
   1978. kaṭikka oru elumpum illai, kātil miṉukka ōlaiyum illai .
   She has not even a single bone to pick, nor has she an ear-ornament to
   polish.
   1979. kaṭikkiṟa nākam kalantu uṟavākumā?
   Will the cobra be affected by friendly intercourse?
   1980. kaṭikkiṟa nāykkuk kaḻuttil kuṟuṅ kayiṟu.
   A short rope round the neck of a bitingdog.
   1981. kaṭitāṉa piḷḷai peṟṟārukku utavumā ?
   Will an obdurate child prove helpful to its parents ?
   1982. kaṭitāṉa col aṭiyilum valitu.
   A harsh word is more painful than a blow.
   1983. kaṭitta pākkum koṭāta ciṟṟappaṉ kaṭaitteru varaiyil
   vaḻiviṭṭāṉām.
   It is said that his uncle who would not give even a bite of an
   areca-nut, bore him company to the bazaar.
   1984. kaṭitta vāy tuṭaittāṟpōla.
   Like wiping the mouth after biting.
   1985. kaṭitta pāmpukku pāl vārttāl viṣattait tarum atu
   pōlappollātavarkkuc ceyyum upakāram irukkum.
   When milk is placed before a biting. snake, in return it gives poison,
   and such is the return for the favours done to the wicked.
   1986. kaṭitta mūṭṭaiyum cari, kaṭiyāta mūṭṭaiyum cari.
   Bugs are all the same whether they bite or not.
   1987. kaṭitta nāykkuk kāṭiyaik koṭu.
   Give vinegar to the dog that bit you.
   1988. kaṭittālum kaṭikkaṭṭum. nī kollātiru.
   No matter if it bite you, do not kill it.
   1989. kaṭitta nāyaip payittiyam koṇṭatu eṉṟu colvārkaḷ.
   They will call that a mad dog which has bitten some one.
   1990. kaṭinta collilum kaṉinta collē naṉmai.
   A kind word is better than a harsh one.
   1991. kaṭiyāta mūṭṭaiyeṉṟu viṭṭu viṭuvārkaḷā?
   Will they let a bug escape because it did not bite ?
   1992. kaṭiyum cuṟukkuttāṉ aṭiyum cuṟukkuttāṉ.
   Both the bite and the stroke were quickly affected.
   1993. kaṭukiccu muṭukiccu vaṭukacci kaliyāṇam.
   The Vaduga woman's wedding is come nigh.
   1994. kaṭuku pōkiṟa iṭattil taṭi eṭuttukkoṇṭu tirivāṉ, pūcaṉikkāy
   pōkiṟa iṭam teriyātu.
   He walks about with a staff in a place that will admit a mustard seed,
   and yet he is ignorant of the place where a pumpkin might easily pass.
   1995. kaṭuku ciṟuttālum kāram pōkātu.
   Though small, the mustard seed is not without pungency.
   1996. kaṭuku pōṉa iṭam ārāyvār pūcaṉikkāy pōṉa iṭam teriyātu.
   They search for a grain of mustard seed, but not for a missing pumpkin.
   1997. kaṭuku pōṉa iṭam ārāyvār miḷaku pōṉa iṭam ārāyār.
   They search for a grain of mustard seed. but not for a grain of pepper.
   1998. kaṭukuk kaḷavum kaḷavutāṉ karppūrak kaḷavum kaḷavutāṉ.
   Theft is theft whether as regards a mustard seed or camphor.
   1999.kaṭukkāykku ataṇi nañcu, cukkiṟkup puṟaṇi nañcu.
   The kernel of the gall-nut and the skin of ginger are poisonous.
   2000. kaṭuṅkāṟṟu maḻai kāṭṭum, kaṭuñciṉēkam pakai kāṭṭum.
   Strong wind foretells rain, excessive friendship foreshows hatred.
   2001.kaṭuñ ciṉēkam kaṇṇukkup pakai.
   Excessive intimacy will prove unfriendly to one's eyes.
   2002.kaṭuñceṭṭuk kāriyakkēṭām.
   It is said that hard dealing fails in its object.
   2003. kaṭuñceṭṭuk kaṇṇaik keṭukkum.
   Unfair dealing destroys the eyes.
   2004. kaṭuñcoṟ kēṭṭāl kātukku aruvaruppu.
   It is shocking to the ears to hear harsh words.
   2005. kaṭumuṭukkaṭā cēvakā kamparici aṭā campaḷam.
   Peon, my fellow, you are too strict, you have kamboo rice only as
   wages.
   2006. kaṭumpaci kal matil uṭaittum kaḷavu ceyyac collum.
   Extreme hunger will induce a man to break through a stone wall and
   steal.
   2007. kaṭai keṭṭa vāḻvu talai kaṭṭa nēram illai.
   Labouring in menial offices she has not leisure to put up her tresses.
   2008. kaṭaikkuk kaṭai āḷ iruppārkaḷ.
   Each bazaar will have its attendant.
   2009. kaṭaicic cōṟṟukku mōrum, kāl māṭṭiṟkup pāyum vēṇṭum.
   Buttermilk for the last distribution of rice, and a mat for the foot of
   the bed are indispensable.
   2010. kaṭait tēṅkāy eṭuttu vaḻip piḷḷaiyārukku uṭaittāṟpōl.
   Like taking up a cocoanut in the bazaar and breaking it to Ganesa.
   2011. kaṭaiyilē koṇṭu maṉaiyilē vaikkiṟāṉ.
   He buys in the bazaar, and bestows at home.
   2012. kaṭaiyil arici kañcikku utavumā, apicāri puruṣaṉ āpat tukku
   utavuvāṉā?
   Will the rice in the bazaar serve for kanji, will the paramour of an
   adulteress be of service to her in distress?
   2013. kaṭaiyil vantatum ariciyō naṭaiyil ventatum cātamō?
   Is that which comes to the bazaar rice? Is boiled rice cooked by the
   way desirable ?
   2014. kaṭaiyilē kaṭṭit tūkkiṉālum aḻukaṟ pūcaṇikkāy aḻukalē.
   Although rotten pumpkins are tied up in the bazaar, they are still
   rotten.
   2015. kaṭṭappāraiyai viḻuṅkic cukkuk kaṣāyam kuṭittatupōla.
   Like drinking a decoction of dry ginger after swallowing a crow-bar.
   2016. kaṭṭāntarai aṭṭaipōla.
   Like a wood-louse on dry ground.
   2017. kaṭṭikkoṇṭu varaccoṉṉāl veṭṭikkoṇṭu varuvāṉ.
   When told to tie and bring, he cuts and brings.
   2018. kaṭṭi aḻukiṟapōtu kaiyum tuḻāvukiṟatē.
   When she embraces and weeps, her hand is groping to steal.
   2019. kaṭṭil uḷḷa iṭattil piḷḷai peṟṟuc cukkuk kaṇṭa iṭattil
   kāyamtiṉpāḷ.
   She brings forth her child where she sees a bedstead, and takes the
   prescribed tonic where she sees dry ginger.
   2020. kaṭṭi vaḻi viṭṭāl veṭṭi aracu āḷalām.
   If he organize an army and lead it, he may cut down the enemy and reign
   as a king.
   2021. kaṭṭi aḻukaiyilē eṉ makaḷē uṉakkup peṭṭiyilē kai eṉṉa ?
   My daughter, why is your hand in the basket while you embrace and weep?
   2022. kaṭṭi aṭittāl eṉṉa viṭṭu aṭittāl eṉṉa?
   It makes no difference whether you flog one bound or unbound.
   2023. kaṭṭiṉa vīṭṭukkup paḻutu colluvār palar.
   Many will find fault with a house newly built.
   2024. kaṭṭiṉa vīṭṭukkuk karuttuc colluvār palar.
   Many will express an opinion respecting a house just built.
   2025. kaṭṭiṉavaṉukku oru vīṭāṉāl, kaṭṭātavaṉukkup pala vīṭu.
   He who has built a house has only one, whereas he who has notbuilt
   makes use of many.
   2026. kaṭṭivaitta pūṉaiyai aviḻttu viṭṭu vāpūs vāpūs eṉṟāl varumā?
   On untyingacat and calling puss, puss, will it come?
   2027. kaṭṭilait tiruppip pōṭṭāl talaivali pōmā?
   Will head-achego by turning the bedstead?
   2028. kaṭṭivaitta paṇattait taṭṭip paṟittāṟpōla.
   As if one displaced and carried away money carefully tied up.
   2029. kaṭṭi vitai veṭṭi vitai.
   Provide seed-corn, and sow having tilled the ground
   2030. kaṭṭu aṟinta nāyum alla, kaṉam aṟinta kapparaiyum alla.
   He is not a dog accustomed to restraint, nor a mendicant's dish that
   knows what self-respect is.
   2031. kaṭṭukkuk kaṭṭu māṟik kaṭṭa vēṇṭum.
   Every time you have to tie, you must tie it in a different way.
   2032. kaṭṭuppaṭṭālum, kavarimāṉ mayirāl kaṭṭup paṭavēṇṭum.
   kuṭṭuppaṭṭālum mōtirak kaiyāl kuṭṭuppaṭa vēṇṭum.
   When bound, it should be by the hair of the roe, and if cuffed, it
   should be bya hand ornamented with jewels.
   2033. kaṭṭuccōṟṟu mūṭṭaiyum iḷam piḷḷaiyum eṭuppatu varuttam.
   It is difficult to carry, besides a child, boiled rice, tied up for all
   journey.
   2034. kaṭṭaikkup pōkumpōtu kālāḻi pīliyā?
   Are toe-rings necessary when a woman goes out to get(?) the firewood?
   2035. kaṭṭōṭē pōṉāl kaṉattōṭē varalām.
   If one sets out auspicious!y, he may return with honour.
   2036. kaṇakkatikārattaip piḷakkum kōṭāli.
   He is an axe splitting the tree of arithmetic.
   2037. kaṇakkaṉ kaṇakku aṟivāṉ, taṉ kaṇakkait tāṉ aṟiyāṉ.
   The accountant is clever at numbers, but he is ignorant of his own
   accounts.
   2038. kaṇakkuk kuñcaiyum kākkaik kuñcaiyum kaṇṭa iṭattilē kaṇṇaik
   kuttu.
   Bore through the eyes of a young kurnum and a young crow wherever you
   find them.
   2039. kaṇakkaip pārttāl piṇakku varum.
   When accounts are examined, difficulties arise.
   2040. kaṇakkaṉukkup paṭṭiṉi uṭaṉ piṟappu.
   To suffer hunger is natural to an accountant.
   2041. kaṇakku aṟinta piḷḷai vīṭṭil iruntāl vaḻakku aṟātu.
   There will be constant disputes in a house should one of its inmates be
   a skillful accountant.
   2042. kaṇakkaṉ vīṭṭuk kaliyāṇam viḷakkeṇṇeykkuk kēṭu.
   A marriage ceremony in the house of an accountant is a waste of oil.
   2043. kaṇakkappiḷḷai ellām eḻuttuppiḷḷai alla.
   All accountants are not learned.
   2044. kaṇapati pūcai kai mēlē payaṉ.
   The pooja of Ganesa has immediate effect.
   2045. kaṇavaṉaip pirintum ayal vīṭṭil irukkiṟatā ?
   What ! in a neighbour's house, separated from your husband?
   2046. kaṇukkāl peruttāl kaṇavaṉait tiṉpāḷ.
   If her ankle grow big, she will be deprived of her husband.
   2047. kaṇ kaṇṭatu kai ceyyum.
   What the eye has seen the hand may do.
   2048. kaṇkuttippāmpupōlap pārttiruntēṉ.
   I was waiting like an eye-snake.
   2049. kaṇ kuruṭṭukku maruntu iṭṭāl teḷiyumā?
   Is blindness curable by an external application ?
   2050. kaṇ kuruṭu āṉālum nittiraiyil kuṟaiyā?
   Though blind, does he sleep the less?
   2051. kaṇ keṭṭa piṉpu cūriya namaskāram ceytu eṉṉa palaṉ?
   What benefit can you expect from the worship of the sun if you have
   lost your eyesight?
   2052. kaṇṭa pāvaṉaiyāyk koṇṭai muṭikkiṟatu.
   Tying one's lock of hair in imitation of others.
   2053. kaṇṭa kaṇṭa kōyil ellām kai eṭuttuk kumpiṭṭēṉ.
   I worshipped with raised hands in every temple I visited.
   2054. kaṇṭatu pāmpu kaṭittatu māṅkoṭṭai.
   That which was seen was a snake, that which bit was the stone of a
   mango fruit.
   2055. kaṇṭatum kāṭci peṟṟatu pēṟu.
   Whatever is seen is a sight, whatever is received is a gift.
   2056. kaṇṭataik kēḷāviṭṭāl uṇṭu uṟaṅka māṭṭāṉ.
   He will neither eat nor sleep without asking whatever he sees.
   2057. kaṇṭataik kēḷāviṭṭāl koṇṭavaṉ aṭippāṉ.
   If she does not attend to the affairs of her family, her husband will
   beat her.
   2058. kaṇṭaṟiyātavaṉ peṇṭu paṭaittāl kāṭu mēṭu ellām vara iḻuttut
   tirivāṉām.
   It is said that if an inexperienced man marries, he will wander about
   dragging his wife; through jungles and over bills.
   2059. kaṇṭataik kaṟkap paṇṭitaṉ āvāṉ.
   By learning what he sees, a person becomes a pundit.
   2060. kaṇṭatu kēṭṭatu collātē kāṭṭumarattilē nillātē.
   Never utter what you have seen and heard, nor stand under a wild tree.
   2061. kaṇṭatu pāmpu kaṭittatu karukku maṭṭai.
   That which he saw was a snake, but he was bit by the rough points of
   the palmyra stem.
   2062. kaṇṭataik kaṟṟukkoṇṭu karaiyēṟu.
   Acquire what you can, and go ashore.
   2063. kaṇṭavaṉ eṭāṉā?
   Will he who finds, not take up?
   2064. kaṇṭāl teriyātā kampaḷiyāṭṭu mayir?
   May not sheep-hair be known as soon as seen?
   2065. kaṇṭāl muṟai collukiṟatu kāṇāviṭṭāl peyar collukiṟatā?
   If present, do you call mentioning the relationship of the party, and
   when absent, his name only ?
   2066. kaṇṭāl āyam kāṇā viṭṭāl māyam.
   If seen, duty, if not seen, fraud.
   2067. kaṇṭu cetta piṇam āṉāl cuṭu kāṭṭiṟku vaḻi teriyum.
   If one die under human observation, his corpse will find its wayto the
   place of cremation.
   2068. kaṇṭu pēcak kāriyam irukkiṟatu mukattil viḻikka veṭkamāy
   irukkiṟatu.
   I have something to speak of in person, but I am ashamed to look at his
   face.
   2069. kaṇṭum kāṇavillai, kēṭṭum kēṭkavillaiyeṉṟu irukka vēṇṭum.
   Behave as though seeing, you see not, and hearing, you hear not.
   2070. kaṇṭu eṭuttavaṉ koṭuppāṉā?
   Will be who finds and takes a thing give it up?
   2071. kaṇṇāl kaṇṭataṟkuc cāṭciyum vēṇṭumā?
   Is a witness needed to prove that which one has seen with his own eye?
   2072. kaṇṇāṟ kaṇṭatu poy akappaikkuṟi mey.
   That which one has seen is false, the sign of agappai is true.
   2073. kaṇṇāṟ kaṇṭataṟku ēṉ akappaikkuṟi?
   Why the sign of an agappai in proof of that which one has seen?
   2074. kaṇṇārak kāṇātatu mūṉṟil oru paṅku.
   That one has not seen with his own eye amounts to one third
   2075. kaṇṇālē cīvaṉ kaṭakaṭa eṉṟu pōṉālum vaṇṇāṉ kaḻutai cumantē
   tīravēṇṭum.
   The ass of a washerman must carry the pack through, though its life may
   depart with a rattling noise through the eyes.
   2076. kaṇṇāṉa pērkaḷai maṇṇākkukiṟāṉ.
   He treats as common earth those who are precious as the eyes.
   2077. kaṇṇāṉa maṉataip puṇṇākkukiṟāṉ.
   Ho wounds the heart which is as tender as the eye.
   2078. kaṇṇālē cīvaṉ kaṭakaṭaveṉṟu pōṉālum vaṇṇāṉukku maḻai nañcu.
   Though the life of the washerman is forced through his eyes by reason
   of drought, rain to him would be poison.
   2079.kaṇṇāṭi niḻaliṟ kaṇṭa paṇam kaṭaṉukku utavumā?
   Will the money reflected in a mirror avail for the payment of debt?
   2080. kaṇṇāṉa pērkaḷaip puṇṇākkiṉāy.
   You have wounded your dearest friends.
   2081. kaṇṇimai kainoṭi aḷavē māttirai.
   The twinkling of the eye, or the snapping of the fingers, is the
   measure of a moment of time.
   2082. kaṇṇiyil akappaṭṭa māṉpōl kalaṅkukiṟāṉ.
   He is dismayed like a deer caught in a snare.
   2083. kaṇṇiyil akappaṭṭa karikkuruvipōl kalaṅkukiṟāṉ.
   He is agitated as an ensnared blackbird.
   2084. kaṇṇiṟ paṭṭāṟ karikkumā, puruvattiṟ paṭṭāṟ karikkumā?
   When will it give pain, when it hits the eye or the eye-brow?
   2085. kaṇṇiṉāl eṇṇuvāṉ.
   He can count with his eyes— at sight.
   2086. kaṇṇiṟ puṇ vantāl kaṇṇāṭi pārkkal ākātu.
   When the eyes become sore, one cannot see them reflected in a mirror.
   2087. kaṇṇiṉ muṉṉē oṉṟu collik kāṇāta iṭattilē iraṇṭucollukiṟatu.
   To assert a thing when in sight and to contradict it when out of sight.
   2088. kaṇṇilē eṇṇey paṭṭāṟ karikkumō piṭariyil paṭṭāl
   karikkumō?
   Will oil give pain when it falls into the eye, or on the back of the
   neck?
   2089. kaṇṇiṟ paṭṭa kaiyait taṟippār illai.
   No one cuts off the hand because it has struck the eye.
   2090. kaṇṇilē paṭṭāl viralait taṟikkiṟatā ?
   Should it strikethe eye is the finger to be cut off?
   2091. kaṇṇilē varukiṟatu puruvattilē.
   The eye brow has received that which threatened the eye.
   2092. kaṇṇil kaṇṭatu kōṭi kāṇātatu aṉantam kōṭi.
   That which was seen was a crore, and that not seen many crores.
   2093. kaṇ uḷḷapōtē kāṭci.
   One has the pleasure of seeing as long as the eyes are unimpaired.
   2094. kaṇ ūṉaṉ kaipporuḷ iḻappāṉ.
   The blind will lose his wealth.
   2095. kaṇṇukkup puruvam kātāmā?
   Is the brow ten miles in advance of the eye?
   2096. kaṇṇukkup puṇṇum alla, kāṇpārkku nōyum alla.
   It is neither an eye-sore, nor painful to beholders.
   2097. kaṇṇum karuttum uḷḷa pōtē kāṇōm ataṉ piṉpu eṉṉa kiṭaikkum?
   We do not realize it when the eye and mind are unimpaired ; what may we
   expect to gain afterwards ?
   2098. kaṇṇukku imai kātāmā?
   Is the eye-lid far apart from the eye?
   2099. kaṇṇukkum cammaṇam koṭṭuvāḷ kampattil aintāṉai kaṭṭuvāḷ.
   She will sit in one's eye cross-legged, and tether five elephants to
   the pole of a dancer.
   2100. kaṇṇai imai kāttatupōl.
   As the eye-lash preserved the eye.
   2101. kaṇṇaik koṭutta teyvam matiyaik koṭuttatu.
   The deity that deprived him of sight gave him superior mental
   endowments.
   2102. kaṇṇaik koṇṭu naṭantatu pōla uṉṉaik koṇṭu naṭantēṉ.
   I guarded you as I did my own eyes.
   2103. kaṇṇaik kaṭṭik kāṭṭil viṭṭatu pōla.
   As one was left in the jungle blindfolded.
   2104. kaṇṇaik kāṭṭi aḻaittāl varātavaḷ kaiyaip piṭittu iḻuttāl
   varuvāḷā?
   Will she who would not come when called by the expression of your eyes,
   obey when taken by the hand?
   2105. kaṇṇaik keṭutta teyvam kōlaik koṭuttatu.
   The deity that destroyed the eyes gave a supporting staff.
   2106. kaṇṇai mūṭik kuṭṭukiṟatā?
   Is it to strike the head after covering the eyes?
   2107. kaṇṇō puṇṇō.
   Is it an eye, or a sore?
   2108. kaṇ terintu naṭappavarkaḷ paḷḷattil viḻamāṭṭārkaḷ.
   They who walk with their eyes open will not fall into the pit.
   2109. kaṇterintu vaḻi naṭakkumpaṭi niṉai.
   Take care that you walk with your eyes open.
   2110. kaṇ pārttāl kai ceyyum.
   If the eye have seen it, the hand may perform it.
   2111. katavaic cāttiṉāl nilai puṟampu.
   When the door is shut, the door-frame is outside.
   2112. katiravaṉ cilaraik kāyēṉ eṉkumō?
   Will the sun say, I will not burn certain persons?
   2113. katiraik kaḷaintum kaḷaiyaip piṭuṅku.
   Weed the corn even at the risk of destroying the ears.
   2114. katir nūl kuṟaintālum kaḷḷacci kaḻuttu nūl kuṟaiyātu.
   Though the thread on the spindle diminishes, that on the neck of a
   kalla woman does not.
   2115. kataikkuk kālum illai talaiyum illai.
   Mere rumours have neither head nor foot.
   2116. kataikkuk kāl illai pēykkup pātam illai.
   Rumours have no legs, nor have demons feet.
   2117. kataiyō pirāmaṇā kantaiyō pottukiṟāy, allaṭī pēy muṇṭāy cīlaippēṉ
   kuttukiṟēṉ.
   Obrahman, do you repeat a story or mend old clothes? No, youfoolish
   widow, I crush the lice in my clothes.
   2118. kattarikkāy cottai eṉṟāl arivāḷ maṇaik kuṟṟam eṉkiṟāḷ.
   When it is said that the brinjal is worm eaten, she imputes it to a
   defect in the knife.
   2119. kattarikkāyilē kālum kaiyum muḷaittāṟpōla.
   As if feet and hands shot forth in the brinjal.
   2120. kattarikkāy virai curaikkāy kāykkātu.
   The seed of a brinjal will not produce gourds.
   2121. kattarikkāy vāṅkap pūcaṇikkāy kocuṟā?
   When you buy a brinjal, will the bazaar people give you a pumpkin in at
   the bargain?
   2122.kattiyum kaṭāvum pōlē.
   Like a knife and a he-goat.
   2123. kattiyaip pārkkilum kaṉa kōpam kolai ceyyum.
   Great anger is more destructive than the sword.
   2124. kattikaṭṭi peṇcāti eppōtum kaimpeṇcāti.
   The wife of a swordsman is at any moment liable to become a widow.
   2125. katti irukkum iṭattukku marai kāvukiṟatā?
   Is the elk to be carried to the knife?
   2126. kattumaṭṭum kattippōṭṭuk katavaic cāttiviṭṭup pō.
   Bawl out as long as you like, and shut the door when you go.
   2127. kattu kattu eṉṟāl kaḻutaiyum kattātu, collu collu eṉṟāl pulavaṉum
   collāṉ.
   When repeatedly urged to bray, even an ass will not do so, when asked
   to sing, even a poet will refuse.
   2128. kanta poṭik kaṭaikkāraṉukku vācaṉai teriyumā?
   Does the perfumer appreciate the distinction of scents?
   2129. kantaikkut takka pontai.
   The hole is in proportion to the rag.
   2130. kantaikkuc caraṭu ēṟukiṟatu ellām palam.
   The more it is stitched and the stronger does the rag become.
   2131. kantai āṉālum kacakki uṭu, kūḻ āṉālum kuḷittuk kuṭi.
   Though only a rag, Wash it and put it on, and if but kanji, drink it
   after ablution.
   2132. kapaṭa iṉ colliṉum kaṭiya collē nalam.
   Better is a harsh word than one smooth and feigned.
   2133. kapālak kuttu kaṇṇaic cuḻittatu.
   Severe head-ache caused the eyes to sink.
   2134. kappalilē pātippākkup pōṭṭatu pōlē.
   Like dropping a bit of areca-nut in a ship.
   2135. kappal ēṟip paṭṭa kaṭaṉ koṭṭai nūṟṟut tīrkkavēṇṭum.
   Debt incurred by the sea-faring merchant must be discharged by spinning
   cotton.
   2136. kappal ōṭip paṭṭa kaṭaṉ koṭṭai nūṟṟut tīrumō?
   Can a debt incurred on account of a sea-faring life be discharged by
   spinning?
   2137. kappaṟkāraṉ peṇṭāṭṭi toppaikkāri, kappal uṭaintāl piccaikkāri.
   The ship owner's wife is in good condition as long as the ship is safe,
   but if that be lost she is a beggar.
   2138. kappaṟkāraṉ vāḻvu kāṟṟu aṭittāl pōccu.
   The prosperity of the ship-owner is at the mercy of the wind.
   2139. kamariṟ kaviḻnta pāl amararkku iṭṭa aṉṉam.
   Milk poured into a crevice, rice offered to enemies.
   2140. kampap piccaiyō kaṭaip piccaiyō?
   Are not alms obtained by pole-dancing the lowest species of alms?
   2141. kampaḷiyilē ēṟṟacōṟṟai mayir mayir eṉkiṟatā ?
   Is it to say that the boiled rice received in a cumbly is full ofhair ?
   2142. kampaḷi viṟṟa paṇattukku mayir muḷaittu irukkiṟatā?
   Does hair grow in the money for which cumblies have been sold?
   2143. kampaḷiyil oṭṭiṉa kūḻaippōla.
   Like food sticking to a cumbly.
   2144. kampaḷimēl piciṉ.
   Gum on a cumbly.
   2145. kampaṉ vīṭṭuk kaṭṭuttaṟiyum kavi pāṭum.
   Even the peg to which a cow is tied at Kamban's house will sing.
   2146. kampukkuk kaḷai veṭṭiṉāṟpōlum irukkavēṇṭum, tampikkup peṇ
   koṇṭāṟpōlum irukkavēṇṭum.
   Arrange it so that when he goes to weed the rye, he may also engage a
   wife for his younger brother.
   2147. kammāḷaṉ pacuvaik kātu aṟuttuk koḷḷavēṇṭum.
   One must buy a smith's cow after cropping her ears.
   2148. kammāḷaṉ vīṭṭil piḷḷai piṟantāl tēvaṭiyāḷ teruvil carkkarai
   vaḻaṅka vēṇṭum.
   When a child is born in a smith's family, sugar must be dealt out in
   the street of the dancing girls.
   2149. kammāḷaṉ nāy cammaṭṭit toṉikku añcumā?
   Will the smith's dog be alarmed at the sound of a hammer?
   2150. kayiṟu illāp pamparam pōla.
   Like a top without a string.
   2151. kayiṟṟaip pāmpeṉṟu eṇṇik kalaṅkukiṟatu.
   Trembling at a bit of rope thinking it to be a snake.
   2152. karakattu nīr kātaṅ kākkum.
   Water in a hand-pot will avail for a katham.
   2153. karaṭi piṟai kaṇṭatu pōla.
   As a bear saw the new moon.
   2154. karaṭi turattiṉālum kaikkōḷat teruvil pōka vaḻi irātu.
   Though one be pursued by a bear, he may not escape through weavers'
   street.
   2155. karaṭiyāl turattappaṭṭavaṉukkuk kampaḷikkāraṉaik kaṇṭāṟ payam.
   He who has been kicked by a bear, fears the sight of one who sells
   cumblies.
   2156. karaṭi puṟṟilē vāy vaittāṟpōl, karuṭaṉ kāliṟ cataṅkai kaṭṭiyatu
   pōl.
   As the bear puts its nose into the anthill, as small bells were tied to
   the legs of a kite.
   2157. karaṇam tappiṉāl maraṇam.
   To fail in a somersault may be fatal.
   2158. karam māṟik kaṭṭiṉāl kaṉam kuṟaiyātu.
   Excessive cording will not diminish the weight of a package.
   2159. karippukku iruntu piḻai, kalakattukku ōṭip piḻai.
   In famine, save your life where you are, in war, by flight.
   2160. karippilē piḷḷai viṟṟāṟpōlē.
   Like selling a child in famine.
   2161. karu illāta vittaiyum kuru illā cīṣaṉum pōl.
   Like an art without ingenuity to comprehend it, and a disciple without
   a teacher.
   2162. karukki urukki neyvārttālum kaṇṭa niyāyantāṉ colluvāṉ.
   Though you give him fried meat and pour melted ghee on his rice, he
   will say nothing
   but what he saw.
   2163. karuṅkaṇṇi paṭṭāl karaiyāṉ kaṇṇālum tirumpip pārāṉ.
   When the karunkanni fish is caught, the fisherman does not even turn to
   look at it.
   2164. karuṅkallilē nār urippāṉ.
   He will strip fibre from a piece of granite.
   2165. karuṅkāli ulakkaikku veḷḷip pūṇ kaṭṭiṉatupōla.
   As a silver ferrule fastened to an ebony pestle.
   2166. karuṅkālik kaṭṭaikku vāy nāṇāk kōṭāli iḷa vāḻait taṇṭukku vāy
   nāṇumā?
   Will an axe whose edge-is not blunted by cutting a piece of ebony be
   made dull by cutting a stem of a plantian tree ?
   2167. karuṭaṉ kālil keccai kaṭṭiṉatu pōla.
   As a string of small bells was tied to the leg of a kites.
   2168. karuṭaṉaik kaṇṭa pāmpu pōla.
   Like a snake in sight of a kite.
   2169. karuppaṅkaṭṭiyilum kallu irukkum.
   Stones, may be found even in sugar candy.
   2170. karum oḻuṅku perumaikku aḷavu.
   Consistency of action is the measure of greatness.
   2171. karumattai muṭikkiṟavaṉ arumai oṉṟum pārāṉ.
   A resolute man cares nothing about difficulties.
   2172. karumāṉ irunta iṭamum kaḻutai puraṇṭa kaḷamum cari.
   A blacksmith's shop, and the place in which asses roll themselves are
   alike.
   2173. karumpilum tēṉ irukkum kaḷḷiyilum pāl irukkum.
   There is honey in sugarcane there is sap in milk-hedge.
   2174. karumpukkaṭṭikku eṟumputāṉē varum.
   Ants will of course be attracted by a lump of sugar-candy.
   2175. karumpu muṟittuk kaḻutaiyai aṭitta katai.
   The story of one striking an ass with a sugar-cane.
   2176.karumpaik kaḻutai muṉ pōṭṭāl kaḻutaikkut teriyumō karumpu ruci?
   Does the ass enjoy the flavor of the sugar-cane that is placed before
   it?
   2177. karumpu tiṉṉak kūliyā?
   What, a reward for eating sugar-cane?
   2178. karumpum vēmpu āyiṟṟē.
   Even sugar cane has become a margosa tree.
   2179. karumpukku uḻuta, puḻuti kāycciṉa pālukkuc carukkarai āmā ?
   Will earth pulverised by the plough for sugar-cane, answer for sugar to
   be mixed with boiled milk?
   2180. karumpu kacakkiṟatu vāykkuṟṟam.
   If sugar-cane provebitter to the palate, it is the fault of the mouth.
   2181. karumpu ruciyeṉṟu vērōṭu piṭuṅkalāmā?
   May sugar-cane be plucked up by the root because it is of fine flavor?
   2182. karumpai virumpa, atu vēmpu āyiṟṟu.
   If taken to excess sugar-cane becomes bitter as margosa.
   2183. karumpu kaṭṭōṭē irukka eṟumpu tāṉē varum.
   Where bundles of sugar-cane are, there ants will come of themselves.
   2184. karuvu illāta muṭṭaiyum kuru illāta vittaiyum.
   An egg without yolk, an art without a teacher.
   2185. karuvēlamarattiṟku niḻal illai, kaṉṉāṉukku muṟai illai.
   The karuvel Acasia casts no shade, smiths observe no relationship in
   marrying.
   2186. karai kāṇāta tōṇipōla.
   As a doney out of sight of land.
   The common name of a country vessel, some of which are of considerable
   size. They have no deck and are thatched with palm leaves
   2187. karai taṭṭiṉ kappal pōla.
   Like a stranded vessel.
   2188. karaippakkam pātai irukkak kappal ēṟiṉavaṉum, collāta tai
   maṉaiyāḷukkuc coṉṉavaṉum paṭṭa pāṭupōla.
   Like the misery endured by him who embarked when there was a way by
   land, and by the husband who revealed to his wife that which he ought
   not.
   2189. karaippār karaittāṟ kallum karaiyum.
   Under the management of the skilful, even a stone may be dissolved.
   2190. kalakattilē puḷukātavaṉ narakattilē pōvāṉām.
   It is said that he who does not exaggerate when a tumult occurs will go
   to hell.
   2191. kalakattilē pōyum kālmāṭu talaimāṭā?
   In regard to a bed is the distinction of head and foot observed in a
   battle-field?
   2192. kalakam kalantāl ulakam kalaṅkum.
   In a general insurrection universal consternation prevails.
   2193. kalakam piṟantāl niyāyam piṟakkum.
   Popular agitation leads to justice.
   2194. kalakamē meyyāṉāṟ puḷukātavaṉ pāvam.
   If an insurrection exists, it is wrong not to make it known.
   2195. kalakkantai kaṭṭik kāṇap pōṉāl irukalak kantai kaṭṭi etirē
   vantāḷ.
   When I went in rags to see her, she appeared enveloped in double the
   quantity.
   2196. kalak kampu tiṉṟālum kāṭai kāṭṭilē.
   Though it may consume a kalam of grain, the quail lives in the jungle.
   2197. kalakkiṉum kaṭal cēṟākātu.
   Though never so troubled, the sea does not, become muddy.
   2198. kalattilē cōṟṟai iṭṭuk kaiyaip piṭittāṟpōla.
   Like holding the hand after putting rice on the plate.
   2199. kala nellukkuk kala umi irukkumā?
   Will a kalam of paddy yield a kalam of husks?
   2200. kalap paṇattaip pārkkilum oru kiḻap piṇam nallatu.
   The corpse of an old person is better than immense wealth.
   2201. kalap pāl kaṟakkalām tuḷip pāl mulaikku ēṟṟalāmā ?
   A kalam of milk may be drawn; can a drop beinfused into the teat?
   2202. kalap pālukkut tuḷip purai.
   A drop of butter-milk or curds to a kalam of milk.
   2203. kalappāṉālum pūcapūcap poṉṉiṟam.
   Though not pure, repeated gilding will give it the colour of gold.
   2204. kalap pālil oru tuḷi viṣam kalantāṟpōlē.
   Like putting a drop of poisonin a kalam of milk.
   2205.kalap pāl kuṭittapūṉai āḻākkup pāl kuṭiyātā?
   Will not a cat that has drunk a kalam of milk drink alak?
   2206.kala mā iṭittavaḷ pāviyum, kappi iṭittavaḷ puṇṇiyavatiyumā?
   Is she who pounded a kalam of flour vicious, and she who pounded
   prolong(?) virtuous?
   2207. kalam kalantāl kulam kalakkum.
   When plates are interchanged, tribal marriages interchange.
   2208. kalam kuttiṉālum patar arici ākātu.
   Though a kalam of chaff bepounded, it will not become rice.
   2209. kala umi tiṉṟāl oru arici taṭṭātā?
   If a kalam of chaff be eaten may not a grain of rice turn up?
   2210. kaliyāṇac cantaṭiyil tāli kaṭṭa maṟantāṉām.
   It is said that he forgot to tie the tali owing to the bustle at the
   wedding.
   2211. kaliyāṇattilum pañcam illai, kaḷattilum pañcam illai.
   No scarcity at a wedding, nor in the threshing floor.
   2212. kaliyāṇa vīṭṭil pantaṟkālaik kaṭṭi aḻukiṟavaḷ cetta vīṭṭil cummā
   iruppāḷā?
   Will the woman who wept as sheclung to the post of a marriage pandal at
   be silent when she attends a funeral?
   2213. kaliyāṇa vīṭṭiṟkup pōy aṟiyāṉ, mēḷac cattamum kēṭṭu aṟiyāṉ.
   He has never been at a wedding, nor has he heard the sound of a
   tom-tom.
   2214. kaliyāṇam ceytum caṉṉiyāciyā?
   What, though married yet a Sanyasi-ascetic?
   2215. kal ākilum kaṇavaṉ, pul ākilum puruṣaṉ.
   Though in heart hard as a stone, and worthless as a blade of grass, he
   is your husband.
   2216. kal eṟikkut tappiṉālum kaṇ eṟikkut tappakkūṭātu.
   Though one may escape the cast of a stone, he cannot escape theglance
   of an evil eye.
   The evil eye kaṇṇūṟu and the evil tongue nāvūṟu are fearedvery
   generally. To avert their influence as regardsfruits &c, in a garden,
   it is common to put up some object of attraction as a water-pot
   whitewashed, inverted on a stump, and dotted with black spots &c. In
   some enclosures grotesque images are seen.
   2217. kallaṭic cittaṉ pōkiṟa vaḻi, kāṭu mēṭu ellām taviṭu poṭi.
   All the rough and rugged ground before the stone-cutter will be reduced
   to powder.
   2218. kallāṭam paṭittavaṉōṭu mal āṭātē
   Do not contend with him who has studied Kalladam.
   Kalladam a work on the third part of grammar is said to be extremely
   dry.
   2219.kallātār celvattilum kaṟṟār vaṟumai nalam.
   The poverty of the learned is better than the wealth of theunlearned.
   2220. kallāta oruvaṉ kulanalam pēcutal nelluṭaṉ piṟanta patarākummē.
   The illiterate who boast of high rank may be compared to the dust mixed
   with paddy-unhusked rice.
   2221. kallār uṟavilum kaṟṟōr pakai nalam.
   The enmity of the learned is better than the friendship of the
   illiterate.
   2222. kallār uṟavakal kāmak kaṭal kaṭa.
   Keep at a distance from the unlettered; cross the sea of passion.
   2223. kallilum vaṉmai kaṉa mūṭar neñcam.
   The heart of a great fool is harder than a stone.
   2224. kallilē nār urikkiṟatu pōla.
   Like stripping fibre from a stone.
   2225. kallum tēṅkāyum pōlap pēcukiṟāṉ.
   He speaks as effectively as the hitting of a stone on a cocoanut.
   2226. kallum kāvēriyum uḷḷa maṭṭum vāḻka.
   May you live as long as the rocks and the Cauveri exist.
   The river Cauveri rises in the western ghauts and flows into the bay of
   Bengal. It is the source of the great fertility of Tanjore and the
   adjacent districts. According to the legend it originated in the
   following manner. In ancient times when the people of southern India
   suffered from drought, Ganesa became incarnate in the form of a crow.
   As such he visited the abode of an ascetic on one of the western hills.
   He there alighted up the waterpot of a hermit and upset it. The water
   thus spilt, by reason of the hermit's merit, he came a river : the
   current spelling would make the name the lake of the crow: the legend
   requires the word to be spelt kālēṟi crow
   mounting, whereas kāvēri lake of the crow is common.
   2227. kallu varukiṟa vicaiyaik kaṇṭāl pallaic cikkeṉa mūṭa vēṇṭum.
   On seeing the rapid approach of a stone press your teeth and shut your
   mouth.
   2228. kallai ākilum karaikkalām, mūrkkaṉ maṉataik karaikkal ākātu.
   Even stones may be dissolved, but the mind of a fool cannot.
   2229. kallaik kaṇṭāl nāyaik kāṇōm, nāyaik kaṇṭāl kallaik kāṇōm.
   On finding a stone we see no dog, on seeing a dog we find no stone.
   2230. kallaik kuttuvāṉēṉ kai nōkiṟatu eṉṟu aḻuvāṉēṉ?
   Why beat a stone and then weep, exclaiming it has pained my hand?
   2231. kallaip pōlak kaṇavaṉ irukkak kañcikku aḻuvāṉēṉ?
   Why weep for kanji while you have a husband as hard as a stone ?
   2232. kallaik kiḷḷik kai iḻantatu pōlām.
   Like losing the hand by pinching a stone.
   2233. kalvi illāṉ celvam kaṟpillāḷ aḻaku.
   Wealth without learning is like beauty without chastity.
   2234. kalvi eṉṟa payirukkuk kaṇṇīr eṉṟa maḻai vēṇṭum.
   Plants of learning flourish in the rain of tears.
   2235. kalviyum kulamum velvatu viṉavil.
   When inquiring what will prevail, one's learning and rank naturally
   occur.
   2236. kalvi uḷḷa iḷaiñaṉ kaṉa kiḻavaṉ.
   A well instructed youth is an old man.
   2237. kalviyaip paṅkupōṭa ēlātu.
   Learning cannot be allotted in portions-to persons.
   2238. kavaṇeṟi neṟiyil nillātē, kaṇṭavaṉ talaiyai uṭaikkum.
   Do not stand in the way of a stone from a sling, it may break the head
   of the beholder.
   2239. kavi koṇṭārkkuk kīrtti, ataic cevikoḷḷārkku avakīrtti.
   Praise to those who approve of a poem, and blame to those who will not
   listen to it.
   2240. kavikkoṇṭārkkum kīrtti kalaippārkkum kīrttiyā?
   Are those who accept a poem and those who reject it alike praise
   worthy?
   2241. kavintirāṇam kajēntirāṇam rājāvē niṟpayē vaki.
   Oking, manage a poet laureate and a superior elephant without fear.
   2242. kavaiyaippaṟṟik kaḻutaiyiṉ kālaip piṭi.
   To effect your object, if necessary, cling to the legs of an ass.
   2243. kaḻutai kāṇavēṇṭiṉāl kuṭṭiccuvarilē kāṇalām.
   If an ass be wanted, it may be found feeding near a ruinous wall.
   2244. kaḻutaik keṭṭāl kuṭṭiccuvar.
   If an ass be out of condition, it will be as useless as a ruinous wall.
   2245. kaḻutaikku ēṉ kaṭivāḷam?
   Why a bridle for an ass?
   2246. kaḻutaip puṇṇukkup puḻuti maruntu.
   Dust is medicine for the gores of an ass.
   2247. kaḻutaiyum kutiraiyum cari āmā ?
   Are an ass and a horse equal ?
   2248. kaḻutaiyum kutiraiyum piṇaittāṟpōla.
   Like yoking an ass and a horse together.
   2249. kaḻutai aṟiyumā kantappoṭi vācaṉai?
   Can an ass appreciate fragrant powder?
   2250. kaḻutaikkuc cēṇam kaṭṭiṉālum kutirai āmā ?
   Does an ass become a horse by being saddled?
   2251. kaḻutai tēyntu kaṭṭeṟumpu āyiṟṟu.
   The ass by wearing away has become an ant.
   2252. kaḻutaikku ēṉ kaliṉam, allatu kaṭivāḷam?
   Why a bit or a bridle for an ass?
   2253. kaḻutaiyaik kaṭṭi ōmam vaḷarttatu pōla.
   Like tying an ass and feeding a sacrificial fire.
   This proverb relates to the following story. A certain Maharaja had a
   barber who had evinced great skill in shaving his royal master when he
   was asleep. To reward him the King resolved to elevate him in the
   socialscale. The brahmans were called and ordered to make a brahman of
   the barber. They set to work, kindled a sacred
   fire and the barber was led round it, whilst the priests uttered the
   required incantations for accomplishing their purpose. The prime
   minister being of a somewhat facetious temperament determined to
   metamorphose an ass. As the proverb intimates he kindled a fire and led
   the animal round it. When the King
   saw him thus engaged he asked him what he was doing. The prime minister
   replied by stating that if the brahmans could make a brahmanof a barber
   he thought an ass might be made into a horse, and he was therefore
   engaged in the ceremony.
   2254. kaḻutaikku upatēcam kātilē coṉṉālum apayak kural aṉṟi aṅku oṉṟum
   illai.
   Though religious instruction be whispered in the ears of an ass nothing
   will come of it but the accustomed braying.
   2255. kaḻutaikku vāḻkkaippaṭṭu utaikku añcalāmā?
   Having married an ass, do you fear his kicking ?
   2256. kaḻutaimēl ēṟi eṉṉa, iṟaṅki eṉṉa ?
   What matters it whether you mount an ass, or alight from one ?
   2257. kaḻutaimēl ēṟiyum perumai illai, iṟaṅkiyum ciṟumai illai.
   Though you may ride on an ass, you gain no honour, nor are you
   disgraced by dismounting.
   2258. kaḻutai uḻutu vaṇṇāṉ kuṭi āṉāṉā?
   Did the washerman become a farmer by ploughing with an ass ?
   2259. kaḻutai uḻutu kuṟavaṉ kuṭi āṉāṉā?
   Has the forester become a farmer by ploughing with an ass?
   2260. kaḻutai mayir piṭuṅkiṉāl ilāpam eṉṉa naṣṭam eṉṉa ?
   What profit or loss will arise from plucking off the hair of an ass ?
   2261. kaḻutai mayir piṭuṅkit tēcam kaṭṭi āḷvāṉā?
   Can one reign as a king by selling ass-hair?
   2262. kaḻutaikkut teriyumā kastūri vācaṉai?
   Does an ass appreciate the odour of musk?
   2263.kaḻutaikkup paratēcam kuṭṭiccuvar.
   The foreign country of an ass is a ruinous wall.
   2264. kaḻutai tappiṉāl kuṭṭiccuvariṭattil irukkum.
   If an ass goes astray, it may be found near a ruinous wall.
   2265. kaḻutaip potiyil aiṅkala māṟāṭṭamā?
   Are there five kalams of fraud in the pack on an ass?
   2266. kaḻutai viṭṭai āṉālum kai nirampa vēṇṭum eṉkiṟāy.
   You say get a handful, although it be but ass dung.
   2267. kaḻuttilē karimaṇi illai peyar muttumālai.
   Her name is pearl necklace, yet on her neck she has not a black bead.
   2268. kaḻuvik kaḻuvip piṉṉum cēṟṟai mitikkiṟatā?
   What ! is it to tread in the mud every time you wash your feet?
   2269. kaḻuvukku ēṟṟa kōmuṭṭi.
   A komutti exactly fitted to the stake.
   2270. kaḷam cāṟukiṟavaḷai miraṭṭuvāṉām pōr piṭuṅkukiṟavaṉ.
   It is said that he who steals grain from the stack, will frighten away
   the women who
   may sweep the threshing floor.
   2271. kaḷaiyak kūṭātataik kaṇṭāl aṭi peyarntu appuṟam pō.
   If you cannot pluck up, pass by on the other side.
   2272. kaḷaiyak kūṭātataik kaṇṭiyāmal cakittukkoḷ.
   Do not fret yourself about that which cannot be avoided.
   2273. kaḷ viṟṟuk kalappaṇam campātippatai viṭak kaṟpūram viṟṟuk
   kāṟpaṇam campātippatu mēl.
   It is better to gain a quarter of a fanam by selling camphor than a
   kalam by selling toddy.
   2274. kaḷḷaṉum āki viḷakkum piṭikkiṟāṉ.
   He plays the thief and also holds the lamp.
   2275. kaḷḷa vicuvācam kaḻuttellām cepamālai.
   The neck of the hypocrite is covered with rosaries.
   2276. kaḷḷaṉaiyum veḷḷa aṇaiyum kaṭṭiviṭu.
   Secure a thief by tying, and a flood by damming it up.
   2277. kaḷḷap piḷḷaiyilum cellappiḷḷai uṇṭā?
   Are there any indulged ones among the children of kallars?
   2278. kaḷḷaṉai āru naḷḷār eṉṟum.
   No one will ever approve of a thief.
   2279. kaḷḷaṉukku ūrellām viḷḷāp pakai.
   The whole country owes implacable hatred to a thief.
   2280.kaḷḷa māṭu cantai ēṟātu.
   A vicious bullock will not be brought to market.
   2281. kaḷḷaṉai nampiṉālum kuḷḷaṉai nampalākātu.
   A rogue may be trusted, but not a dwarf.
   2282. kaḷḷaṉ piṉ pōṉālum kuḷḷaṉ piṉ pōkappaṭātu.
   One may follow a rogue without risk, but not a dwarf.
   2283. kaḷḷaṉ accam kāṭu koḷḷātu.
   The jungle is not large enough to contain the fear of robbers.
   2284. kaḷḷa māṭu tuḷḷum.
   An unwilling bullock is restless.
   2285. kaḷḷa maṉam tuḷḷum.
   A guilty mind is agitated.
   2286. kaḷḷaṉ uṟavu uṟavum alla, kācā viṟaku viṟakum alla.
   The friendship of a rogue is not friendship, nor is kasawood fuel.
   2287. kaḷḷaṉ putti tiruṭṭu mēlē.
   The mind of a rogue is set on thieving.
   2288.kaḷḷaṉ piḷḷaikkum kaḷḷap putti.
   Even the child of a thief is characterized by thievish propensites.
   2289. kaḷḷaṉ maṉaivi kaimpeṇ eṉṟum.
   The wife of a thief is at any moment liable to become a widow.
   2290. kaḷḷaṉ maṉaiyāḷaik kaḷavup poruḷaik kāṇum kuṟi kēṭkalāmā?
   Can the wife of a thief be consulted as an augur for the recovery of
   stolen property ?
   2291. kaḷḷaṉum veḷḷamum oṉṟu.
   A thief and a flood are alike.
   2292. kaḷḷaṉukkup pāti veḷḷaṉukkup pāti.
   One half to the rogue, and one half to the honest.
   2293. kaḷḷaṉum tōṭṭakkāraṉum oṉṟu.
   A gardener is another term for a thief.
   2294. kaḷḷaṉum tōṭṭakkāraṉum oṉṟu kūṭiṉāl viṭiyumaṭṭum tiruṭalām.
   If the thief and a gardener are united, one may steal till day-break.
   2295. kaḷḷaṉ koṇṭa māṭu ettuṟai pōyeṉṉa?
   What matters it to what ferry the bull may go that has been bought by a
   thief?
   2296. kaḷḷaṉukkuk kāṇpittavaṉ pakai.
   He who points out a thief is hated by him.
   2297. kaḷḷi peruttu eṉṉa? kāy uṇṭā niḻal uṇṭā?
   What if the kalli grow large ? Has it any fruit or any shade ?
   2298. kaḷḷikku nāṭu ellām kāṭu.
   The whole country is a wild fit for the growth of the kalli.
   2299. kaḷḷik kompukku veḷḷippūṇ kaṭṭiṉatupōla.
   Like attaching a silver ferrule to a kalli stick.
   2300. kaḷḷi eṉṉaṭi kal iḻaippatu? kātil iruppatu pittaḷai.
   Why you hypocrite, inlay with gems ? that which is in the ear is made
   of brass.
   2301. kaḷḷikkum veṭṭik kaṟṟāḻaikkum veṭṭukiṟatu.
   After cutting the kalli to cut the kattalai.
   2302. kaḷḷikkut taṇṇīr kaṇṇilē, nīlikkut taṇṇīr nimaiyilē.
   The tears of a thievish woman are in her eyes, those of an abandoned
   woman are in her eyebrows.
   2303. kaḷḷikku kala nīr kaṇṇilē.
   A thievish woman has a kalam of tears in her eyes.
   2304. kaḷḷikku vēli ēṉ, cuḷḷikkuk kōṭāli ēṉ?
   What avails a fence against a thievish woman, or an axe for cutting
   twigs?
   2305. kaḷḷum cūtum irukkiṟa iṭattil kūttik kaḷḷaṉum iruppāṉ.
   Where there is theft and gambling, there will also be a whoremonger.
   2306. kaḷḷaik kuṭittāl uḷḷataic colvāṉ.
   Should he drink toddy, he will tell the truth.
   2307. kaṟakkiṟatu uḻakkup pāl, utaikkiṟatu pallup paṟakka.
   Yielding an ulak of milk, and kicking out the teeth.
   2308. kaṟanta pālum eccil piṟanta piḷḷaiyum eccil.
   First drawn milk is unclean, and so is a first-born child.
   2309. kaṟanta pāl mulaikku ēṟumā?
   Will the milk that has been drawn, again enter the udder?
   2310. kaṟanta pālaik kāyccāmaṟ kuṭittāl kāca viyāti tāṉē eṭupaṭum.
   If fresh drawn milk unboiled be drunk, consumption may be cured.
   2311. kaṟuttatu ellām taṇṇīr veḷuttatu ellām pāl eṉkiṟāṉ.
   Whatever is black he calls water, and whatever is white he calls milk.
   2312. kaṟuppu veḷuppu ākātu, kacappu iṉippu ākātu.
   Black will not become white, nor bitter sweet.
   2313. kaṟuppu nāy veḷḷai nāy ākumā?
   Will a black dog become white?
   2314. kaṟumuṟukāntap paṭalam vācikkiṟār kavirāyar.
   The poet is reading the section on grumbling.
   2315. kaṟaiyāṉ puṟṟil aravam kuṭikoṇṭatu pōla.
   Like a snake that occupied an ant-hill.
   2316. kaṟaiyāṉ puṟṟup pāmpukku utavukiṟatu.
   An ant-hill is useful to a snake.
   2317. kaṟkaṇṭāṟ ceyta eṭṭikkaṉi kacakkumā ?
   Will etti fruit made of sugar-candy taste bitter ?
   2318. kaṟkaiyil kalvi kacappu, kaṟṟapiṉpu atuvē iṉippu.
   Learning when being acquired is bitter, but when possessed it is sweet.
   2319. kaṟpakataruvaic cārnta kākamum amutam uṇṇum.
   Even a crow that lives in the kalpaka tree feeds on ambrosia.
   2320. kaṟpittavaṉ kaṇṇaik koṭuttavaṉ.
   He who gave the eye is he who taught.
   2321. kaṟpittavaṉ kāppāṟṟuvāṉ.
   He who preordained will protect or guide.
   2322. kaṟpillā aḻaku vācaṉai illāp pū.
   Beauty without chastity, a flower without fragrance.
   2323. kaṟṟa iṭattilā vittaiyaik kāṭṭukiṟatu?
   To practise a trick on him who taught it ?
   2324. kaṟṟavaratu kōpam nīriṉ piḷavupōl māṟum.
   The anger of the learned passes away as water recovers its surface
   after being
   divided.
   2325. kaṟṟatu kaiyaḷavu kallātu ulakaḷavu.
   What he has learnt is a handful, and what he has still to acquire is
   wide as the world.
   2326. kaṟṟatu collāṉ maṟṟu eṉṉa ceyvāṉ?
   What other service will he do for you who would not tell you what he
   has learnt ?
   2327. kaṟṟavaṉukku vittai kāl nāḻi.
   To the artist his art is but a quarter of a nali.
   2328. kaṟṟa vittaiyaik kāyccik kuṭikkiṟavaṉ pōlē.
   Like one who boils and drinks his learning.
   2329. kaṟṟaṟi mōḻaiyāy irātē.
   Be not a learned fool.
   2330. kaṟṟavaṉum uṇpāṉ, peṟṟavaḷum uṇpāḷ.
   A learned man and a fruitful woman will not suffer from want of food.
   2331. kaṟṟāḻai nāṟṟamum pittaḷai vīccamum pōkātu.
   The ill odour of the karrali and the bad smell emitted from brass will
   not leave them.
   2332. kaṟṟāḻai ciṟuttālum āṉai aṭi vaikkātu.
   Though the karralai be small, the elephant will not tread upon it.
   2333. kaṟṟuk koṭutta pēccum kaṭṭik koṭutta cātamum ettaṉai nāḷ niṟkum ?
   How long will words put into one's mouth, and rice prepared for a
   journey, last?
   2334. kaṟṟuk kaṟṟup pēcātē.
   Do not speak in a studied way.
   2335. kaṟṟum kaṟṟaṟimōḻai.
   Though he has learnt, he continues a learned fool.
   2336. kaṟṟum kaṟṟaṟimōḻaiyā?
   What, to be a learned fool?
   2337. kaṟṟōr arumai kaṟṟōr aṟivar.
   The learned know the worth of the learned.
   2338. kaṉa ācai kaṉa naṣṭam.
   Excessive desire entails great loss.
   2339. kaṉa eli vaḷai eṭātu.
   When rata are numerous, they do not burrow.
   2340. kaṉaka māri poḻintatu pōlē.
   As it rained gold.
   2341. kaṉañ ceytāl iṣṭam, kaṉavīṉattāl naṣṭam.
   Dignity gains approval, meanness entails loss.
   2342. kaṉatta uṭamaikku aṉarttam illai.
   Solid jewels are invaluable.
   2343. kaṉattāl iṉamākum paṇattāl caṉamākum.
   Dignity or worth increases relatives, wealth secures society.
   2344. kaṉattiṟku naṟkuṇam cumaitāṅki.
   Virtue is the support of dignity.
   2345. kaṉattaik kaṉam aṟiyum karuvāṭṭup pāṉaiyai nāy aṟiyum.
   Dignity is appreciated by dignity, the pot of dried fish is known to
   the dog.
   2346. kaṉa mūṭaṉ kaipporuḷ iḻappāṉ.
   A great fool loses his substance.
   2347. kaṉavilum kākkaikku malam tiṉkiṟatē niṉaivu.
   Even in its dreams, the crow's thoughts turn on eating filth.
   2348. kaṉavil kaṇṭa paṇam celaviṟku utavumā?
   Will the money seen in a dream meet one's expenses?
   2349. kaṉavil kaṇṭa poruḷ kāṉalil kaṇṭa puṉal.
   The wealth seen in a dream, the water observed in a mirage.
   2350. kaṉavil uṇṭa cōṟu paci tīrkkumā?
   Will the rice consumed in a dream appease hunger ?
   2351. kaṉavilē kaṇṭavaṉukkup peṇ koṭutta katai.
   The story of a woman given in marriage to a man seen in a dream.
   2352. kaṉinta paḻam tāṉē viḻum.
   Ripe fruit falls of itself.
   2353.kaṉinta paḻam nīr tiṉṟīr kāyai ulukkiviṭṭīr.
   You have eaten the ripe fruit, and you have shaken off the unripe.
   2354. kaṉiyai viṭṭuk kāyait tiṉkiṟatā?
   What, to leave ripe fruit and to eat unripe ?
   2355. kaṉmattiṉāṟ cātiyaṉṟic ceṉmattiṉāl illai.
   Caste arises from action, it is not from birth.
   2356. kaṉamaḻai peytālum karuṅkal karaiyumā ?
   Will granite be dissolved by any amount of hail?
   2357. kaṉmattiṉāl vantatu taṉ mantiṉāl pōkavēṇṭum.
   That which has come of action sin must go by alms giving
   religiousmerit.
   2358. kaṉṟu irukkak kācattaṉai pāl kaṟavāp pacu kaṉṟu cetta piṟaku
   kalappāl kaṟakkumā?
   Will a cow that gave milk worth a small coin while its calf lived, give
   a kalam after her calf is dead ?
   2359. kaṉṟukkuṭṭiyai aviḻkkac coṉṉārkaḷā kaṭṭuttaṟiyaip piṭuṅkac
   coṉṉārkaḷā?
   Did they tell you to loose the calf or to pull up the peg?
   2360. kaṉṟum pacuvum kāṭēṟi mēyntāl kaṉṟu kaṉṟu vaḻiyē pacu pacu
   vaḻiyē.
   When the calf and cow go out to graze, each takes its own way.
   2361. kaṉṟukaḷāyk kūṭik kaḷai paṟikkap pōṉāl vaikkōl ākumā cettai
   ākumā?
   If a herd of calves weed the corn, will there be any straw, or ever dry
   stubble?
   2362. kaṉṟaik kaṇṭu ōṭivarum pacuvaippōlē.
   Like a cow that comes running on seeing her calf.
   2363. kaṉṉāṉ naṭamāṭak kuyavaṉ kuṭipōvāṉ.
   When the brazier begins to move, the potter will abandon his
   dwelling-place.
   2364. kaṉṉāṉukku muṉṉē kaḻutai paratēcam pōṉāṟpōlē.
   As an ass went on a pilgrimage before a copper-smith.
   2365. kaṉṉi irukkak kāḷai maṇam pōkalāmā?
   When a virgin is yet unmarried, may the youth-her brother marry?
   2366. kākattilē veḷḷai uṇṭā?
   Are there any white crows ?
   2367. kākattiṉ kaṇṇukkup pīrkkampū poṉ niṟam.
   To the eye of a crow the flower of the gourd is tinged with gold.
   2368. kākam kar eṉṟāl kaṇavaṉai appā eṉṟu kaṭṭikkoḷḷuvāḷām.
   It is said that when a crow caws she will exclaim, alas, and cling to
   her husband.
   2369. kākam ēṟip paṉaṅkāy utirumā ?
   Will palmyra fruit fall because a crow alights on the tree ?
   2370. kākam illāta ūr pāvi illāta ūr.
   Vicious persons are not found in a village which has no crows.
   2371. kākam irukkap paḻam viḻuntatupōla.
   Like the dropping of the fruit when a crow alighted on the tree.
   2372. kākam illāta ūr cōṉakaṉ illāta ūr.
   The country in which crows do not exist is without mussalmans.
   2373. kākam kālamē kā kā eṉṟu kattum.
   Crows will caw at day-break.
   2374. kākkaṉukkum pūkkaṉukkum pūttāyō puṉṉai kaṇṇāḷar varuntaṉaiyum
   poṟukkalaiyō puṉṉai?
   O punnai tree, Alexandrian laurel, hast thou blossomed for Kakan and
   Pookan, couldst not thou have waited till the arrival of my husband ?
   2375. kākkāyk kuñcu āṉālum taṉ kuñcu poṉ kuñcu.
   Though but a young crow, it is a golden one to its mother.
   2376. kākkaiyiṟ karitu kaḷāmpaḻam.
   Kala fruit, earissa, is blacker than a crow.
   2377. kākkaiyum kuyiṟ kuñcait taṉ kuñcu pōl vaḷarkkum.
   Even a crow will bring up a young kuyil-India cuckoo-as her own.
   2378. kākkaikku añcu kuṇam.
   The crow has five characteristics.
   2379. kākkai ēṟiṉatum paṉampaḻam viḻuntatum.
   The alighting of the crow, and the falling of the palmyra fruit.
   2380. kākkaiyum kattik kattip pōkiṟatu karuvāṭum ularntu pōkiṟatu.
   The crowcontinues to caw whilst the karuvadu,(salted fish) dries.
   2381. kākkaiyum kāṟṟum pōkku uṇṭāṉāl varum.
   Crows and windsgo but to return.
   2382. kākkaiyaik kaṇṭu añcuvāḷ karaṭiyaip piṭittuk kaṭṭuvāḷ.
   She is afraid on seeing a crow, and yet she will capture a bear.
   2383.kākkai ēṟiṉ kompu acaiyātā?
   Will not the branch shake on which a crow alights?
   2384. kāci iraṇṭu eḻuttuttāṉ kāṇa ettaṉai nāṭcellum?
   Kasi is formed of two letters only; how many days will it take to reach
   it?
   2385. kācikkup pōyum karumam tolaiyavillai.
   Though one has gone to Benares his sins are not removed.
   2386. kācikkup pōṉālum akappai araikkācu.
   Though taken to Benares, awooden ladle will fetch but half acash.
   2387. kācikkup pōṉālum kati peṟa vaḻi illai.
   Although he may go to Kasi, he will not find the way to heaven.
   2388. kācikkuppōyum muṭattavaci kālil viḻukiṟatā?
   What ! having gone to Kasi is it to fall at the feet of a lame ascetic?
   2389. kāciyil irukkiṟavaṉ kaṇṇaik kuttak kāñcipurattiliruntu kaiyai
   nīṭṭikkoṇṭu pōkiṟatā?
   If you wish to strike the eyes of one at Kasi, do you go, for that
   purpose, with outstretched band from Conjevaram?
   2390. kācu illātavaṉukku varākaṉ pēccu eṉṉa?
   Why should a penniless man talk about pagodas?
   2391. kācu koṭuttāl vēci varuvāḷ, kala nellaik koṭuttāl avaḷ akkāḷum
   āttāḷum kūṭa varuvārkaḷ.
   If you are free with your money a harlot willcome, if you give also a
   kalam of rice, har sister and her mother will come.
   2392. kācukku oru kuñcu viṟṟālum kaṇakkak kuñcu ākātu.
   Though young birds are sold a cash each, an accountant's young bird is
   not good.
   2393. kācukku oru kuñcu viṟṟālum kammāḷak kuñcu ākātu.
   Though sold for a single cash, never buya smith's bird.
   2394. kācukku oru puṭaivai viṟṟālum nāyiṉ cūttu ammaṇam.
   Though cloth may be cheap; dogs go naked.
   2395. kācukkūṭu karikkūṭāyp pōyiṟṟu.
   The money basket has become a charcoal basket.
   2396. kācukkup pōṉa māṉam kōṭi koṭuttālum varātu.
   Chastity lost for a cash will not be recovered by a crore.
   2397. kācaik koṭuttuk kuttu māṭu tēṭukiṟatā?
   Will you buy a vicious cow at a high price?
   2398.kāñcipurattiṟkup pōṉāl kāl āṭṭi uṇṇalām.
   If you go to Conjeverarm, you may eat without labour.
   2399. kāṭikkup pōyt tayir koṇṭuvantatu pōla.
   Like going for vinegar and bringing curds.
   2400. kāṭu kāttavaṉum kaṟcēri kāttavaṉum palaṉ aṭaivāṉ.
   Both will be benefited, he who watches the jungle and he who waits at
   the cutchery.
   2401. kāṭu vā eṉkiṟatu vīṭu pō eṉkiṟatu.
   Home bids me go, and the place of incremation sayscome.
   2402. kāṭu viḷaintālum oru mēṭu viḷaintālum kaṭaṉ kaḻintupōm.
   The debt will be discharged in either case, whether the jungle or
   highland yield a
   good crop.
   2403. kāṭu viḷaiyāviṭṭālum kaṭamai pōkumā?
   Though the waste land has yielded nothing, will the tax be remitted?
   2404. kāṭu ventāṟ cantaṉa maramum vēkātō?
   Should the jungle be consumed, would the sandal wood tree escape?
   2405. kāṭai iṭam āṉāl nāṭṭai āḷalām.
   If a quail crosses one's path to the left, he will govern a province.
   2406. kāṭṭik koṭuttuk kaṭakkap pōy niṟkalāmā?
   Is it proper to betray one, and then stand aloof?
   2407. kāṭṭil āṉaiyaik kāṭṭi vīṭṭil peṇṇaik koṭukkiṟatā?
   Is it to give a girl in marriage when an elephant in the jungle is
   shown as dower?
   2408. kāṭṭilē cettālum vīṭṭilētāṉ tīṭṭu.
   Though a man dies in the jungle, ceremonial uncleanness will attach to
   his house.
   2409. kāṭṭup pūṉaikkuc civarāttiri viratamā?
   Does the wild cat observe the fast of Sivaratri?
   2410. kāṭṭukku eṟitta nilāvum kāṉalukkup peyta maḻaiyum.
   Moonlight in the jungle and rain in the plains.
   2411. kāṭṭu vāḻai vantāl vīṭṭu vāḻvu pōkum.
   When wild plantains come, domestic prosperity will vanish.
   2412. kāṭṭup pēyccuraikkāy kaṟikku ākumā?
   Is a wild gourd fit for curry?
   2413. kāṭṭuk kōḻikku uraṟ kuḻiyē kailācam.
   The hole in a mortar is paradise to a jungle fowl.
   2414. kāṭṭup pūccikaḷ etirtta katai āccu.
   It has become the story of wild insects offering resistance.
   2415. kāṇak kiṭaittatu kārttikaip piṟaipōla.
   That which was seen was like the new moon of November.
   2416. kāṇappaṭṭaṉa ellām aḻiyappaṭṭaṉa.
   All that is seen is temporary.
   2417. kāṇāmal kaṇṭēṉō kampaṅkatirē cintāmal kuttaṭi cilli mūkkē ?
   Have I seen kambu-millet for the first time, pound it without
   scattering thou nose
   bleeding woman?
   2418. kāṇi āḷaṉ vīṭu vēkaccē kālaip piṭittu iḻutta katai.
   The story of one pulling by the feet the landlord whose house was on
   fire.
   2419. kāṇi ēṟak kōṭi aḻiyum.
   While 1/80 is added a crore is destroyed.
   2420. kāṇi kaviḻntu pōkiṟatā ?
   Does land turn upside down?
   2421. kāṇi kāṇiyāyc campātittuk kōṭi kōṭiyāyc celavaḻikka vēṇṭum.
   We must acquire by eightieths and spend by crores.
   2422. kāṇikku ottatu kōṭikku.
   The profit or loss on an eightieth part of a unit, will determine that
   on a crore.
   2423. kāṇi cōmpal kōṭi varuttam.
   A little indolence creates great trouble.
   2424. kāṇi mantam kōṭi tukkam.
   A little indolence will bring great sorrow
   2425. kātam viṭṭu irukātam cuṟṟukiṟatu pōla.
   Like ranging over the distance of two kathams instead of one.
   2426. kātam koṭuttu irukkātam vāṅkukiṟatu pōla.
   Like giving a katham and getting two.
   2427. kātavaḻi pōy aṟiyātāṉ mātam ellām naṭantāṉām.
   He who never walked a katham is said to have walked a whole month.
   2428. kātavaḻi pōy aṟiyāṉ kaḻutaip piṟappu.
   He who never walked a katham is an ass.
   2429. kātavaḻi peyar illāṉ kaḻutaiyōṭu okkum.
   He whose reputation does not reach a katham is like an ass.
   2430. kātilē nārācam ēṟṟiṉāṟ pōla.
   Like an iron wire passed into the ear.
   2431. kātil cilanti ōtaṭi āṉanti.
   O Ananti, I have a boil in my ear, utter an incantation.
   2432. kātu aṟutta kūli kaimēlē.
   The hire for tearing the ear is readily paid.
   2433. kātu aṟuttālum aṟukkum pēṉaip pārttālum pārkkum kuraṅku.
   A monkey may tear the ears or hunt lice if he choose.
   2434. kātu kātu eṉṟāl nāti nāti eṉkiṟāṉ.
   If one says, my ear, my ear, he replies it is mine, it is mine.
   2435. kātu kātu eṉṟāl ceviṭu ceviṭu eṉkiṟāṉ.
   If one cry an ear, an ear, he cries deafness deafness.
   2436. kātu kuttap poṟukkātā?
   Can you not bear the boring of your ears?
   2437. kātukku iṭṭāl mukattukku aḻaku.
   If worn in the ears, they will add beauty to the face.
   2438. kātukkuk kaṭukkaṉ iṭṭu āṭṭikkoṇṭu tirikiṟāṉ.
   Having put on ear-rings he walks about shaking them.
   2439. kātum kātum vaittāṟpōl irukkavēṇṭum.
   It should be as if an ear, and an ear, were brought in contact.
   2440. kātai aṟuttavaṉ kaṇṇaiyum kuttuvāṉā?
   Will he who cut off the ear strike the eye also ?
   2441. kāttiruntavaṉ peṇṭāṭṭiyai vēṟṟu maṉitaṉ piṭittukkoṇṭāṉ.
   A stranger took possession of the wife of him who was watching her.
   2442. kāntamum ūciyum pōl.
   Like a magnet and needle.
   2443. kāppāṉukkuk kaḷḷaṉ illai.
   He who takes care of his property will not be robbed.
   2444. kāyam paṭṭa kuraṅkupōl.
   Like a wounded monkey.
   2445. kāyum puḻuviṟkuc cāyum niḻal pōla.
   Like a falling shadow on a sun-striken worm.
   2446. kāytta marattil kal eṟipaṭum kāyāta marattil kal eṟi paṭumā?
   Stones are thrown at a fruit bearing tree; are they thrown at that
   which does not
   bear?
   2447. kāytta marattilē kal eṟiyum cil eṟiyum.
   Stones and other missiles are thrown at a fruit-bearing tree.
   2448. kāytta maram vaḷaintu niṟkum naṟkuṇam uṭaiyavar taṇintu niṟpār.
   A fruit-bearing tree bends; the virtuous are lowly.
   2449. kāynta maram taḷirkkumā ?
   Will a dry tree bud?
   2450. kāynta māṭu kampilē viḻuntāṟpōla.
   Like a starving cow falling in the kambu-millet.
   2451. kāynta puli āṭṭu mantaiyilē viḻukiṟatupōla .
   Like a hungry tiger falling on a flock of sheep.
   2452. kāynta puli āvilē viḻukiṟatu.
   A lean tiger falls on a cow.
   2453. kāyntālum vennīr avam pōmō?
   Is water useless because it is boiled?
   2454. kāynta vāṉam pēyntāl viṭātu ?
   Rain after drought will not soon cease ?
   2455. kāyntum keṭuttatu pēyntum keṭuttatu.
   It was destroyed by the sun and by the rain.
   2456. kārāmpacuvukkup pullāṉāl nantavaṉattukkuk kaḷaiyumām.
   Grass serves as food for kine, and as an ornament to a flower garden.
   2457. kārikai kaṟṟuk kavi colluvatiṟ pērikai koṭṭip piḻaippatu naṉṟu.
   It is better to live by beating a drum than by composing verses
   according to the rules
   of prosody.
   2458. kāriyakkāraṉ kollaiyilē kaḻutai mēykutu.
   The ass grazes in the grounds of the industrious.
   2459. kāriyattilē kaṇ allāmal vīriyattilē illai.
   His eye is on the object, not on the attendant applause.
   2460. kāriyattukkuk kaḻutaiyiṉ kālaip piṭi.
   If necessary, secure your purpose by clinging to the feet of an ass.
   2461. kāriyam peritō vīriyam peritō?
   Which is the greater, success or boasting?
   2462. kār aṟukkaṭṭum kattari pūkkaṭṭum.
   Wait till the kar paddy is reaped, and the brinjal blossoms.
   2463. kārttikaikku mēl maḻaiyum illai, karṇaṉukku mēl koṭaiyum illai.
   No rain like that of November, no liberality superior to that of
   Karnan.
   Karnan, one of the seven princes distinguished for great generosity.
   2464. kārttikaip piṟaipōlak kaṇṭēṉ.
   I saw it like the third-day moon of November.
   2465.kālañ ceykiṟatu kōlam ceyyātē.
   Time will effect that which mere parade cannot.
   2466. kālañ ceykiṟatu ñālam ceyyātu.
   The world cannot accomplish that which time effects.
   2467. kālattiṉāl ceyta naṉṟi.
   A benefit conferred opportunely.
   2468. kālattiṟ peyta maḻaipōl.
   Like seasonable rain.
   2469. kālattukku ēṟṟa kōlam.
   Equipage suited to the occasion.
   2470. kālamē eḻuntiruntu kākkai viḻikkal ākātu.
   The sight of a crow on rising of a morning is ominous of evil.
   The crow being regarded as the vehicle of Saturn the sight of a single
   crow is inauspicious; two are not so regarded. The cawing of a crow may
   excite apprehension. When this is the case the following formula may be
   used.
   Measure the length of your shadow by the foot and add 12 to the number
   of feet ascertained. Then divide by 7 and the remainder will determine
   the import of the bird's note (1) Good luck, (2) Gain , (3) Rain, (4)
   Conflict, (5) Feasting, (6) Victory. If on dividing by 7 there is no
   remainder the cawing of the crow is ominous of death.
   2471. kālam aṟintu ñālam oḻuku.
   Regulate your affairs with due reference to the times in which you
   live.
   2472. kālam keṭṭuk kaippiccai eṭuttāṟpōla.
   Like receiving alms when in distress.
   2473. kālam aṟintu piḻaiyātavaṉ vāl aṟunta kuraṅku āvāṉ.
   He who does not live according to the times will become an ape.
   2474. kālam pōm vārttai niṟkum, kappal pōl tuṟai niṟkum.
   Time goes, words remain, a ship goes, the shore remains.
   2475. kālam pōṉa kālattil mūlam vantu kuṟukkiṭṭatu pōla.
   As one is subject to piles in his riper years.
   2476. kālam allāta kālattilē kappal ōṭṭi.
   A mariner in anfavourable weather.
   2477. kālālē naṭantāl kātavaḻi, talaiyālē naṭantāl evvaḷavu tūram?
   If on foot it is a katham; how much more distant if one walk on the
   head?
   2478. kālāl muṭintataik kaiyāl aviḻkkakkūṭātu.
   What he tied with his feet others cannot untie with the hands.
   2479. kālilē paṭṭapiṟakā kirakacāram pōtātu ?
   After having hurt the foot is it to be attributed to planetary
   influence?
   2480. kālil viḻukiṟatu nallatu mēlil viḻukiṟatu keṭṭatu.
   To fall at the feet is good, to fall on another is bad.
   2481. kālil paṭṭatu kaṇṇil paṭṭatu pōla.
   That which struck the feet was felt as if it had struck the eye.
   2482. kālukkup pōṭṭāl talaikkup pōṭukiṟāṉ.
   If he puts ornaments on his legs, he will put ornaments on his head.
   2482. kālukkuk kaṭuppē tavira, kaṇṭa palaṉ oṉṟum illai.
   No benefit accrued but the trouble of walking.
   2484. kālukkuk kai utavi kaikkuk kāl utavi.
   The hand helps the legs and the legs help the hands.
   2485. kālukkut takka ceruppum kūlikkut takka uḻaippum.
   A slipper suited to the foot, and labour suited to the hire.
   2486. kālukku ākiṟa ceruppu talaikku ākumā?
   Will a slipper that fits the foot do for the head?
   2487. kālaic cuṟṟiṉa pāmpu kaṭittāl oḻiya viṭātu.
   The snake that has coiled round the leg will not leave without biting.
   2488. kālaic cel pūttāl aṭutta maḻai aṭaṅkum.
   Should winged white-ants come out in the morning the heavy rain will
   cease.
   2489. kālai tuyilvāṉum mālai iruppāṉum patar.
   He who sleeps after day-break, and he who keeps awake in the fore part
   of the night are worthless.
   2490. kālaip piṭitta caṉiyaṉ ūraic cuṟṟi aṭikkum.
   If Saturn seize the feet, he will drive one round the village.
   2491. kālaip paṉikkum kaṇ viḻikkum ottatu celvam.
   Wealth is comparable to the morning dew, and the twinkling of an eye.
   2492. kālai mōṭcamum vālai ñāṉamum nilaikkātu.
   Dreams of bliss and premature wisdom are not lasting.
   2493. kāl aḷavē ākumām kappaliṉ ōṭṭam nūl aḷavē ākumām nuṇcīlai.
   The speed of a vessel is proportioned to the force of the wind, the
   quality of cloth will
   be as the yarn used in its manufacture.
   2494. kāl āṭak kōl āṭum kōl āṭak kuraṅku āṭum.
   The foot puts the stick in motion, as that moves, the monkey dances.
   2495. kāl ciṟitākil kaṉal ūrum kaṉṉiyarmēl māl ciṟitākil maṉam ūrum.
   Where there is a little wind fire will spread, where there is lust the
   affections will be fastened on women.
   2496. kāl naṭaikku iraṇṭu kācu kai vīccukku aintu kācu.
   Two cash for walking on foot, five cash for the swing of the arms.
   2497. kāl māṟik kaṭṭiṉāl kaṉam kuṟaiyumā?
   If one be tied cross-legged, will his weight diminish?
   2498. kālvāyait tāṇṭātavaṉ kaṭalait tāṇṭuvāṉā?
   Can he who cannot leap over a channel leap over the sea?
   2499. kāvaṭip pāram cumakkiṟavaṉukkut teriyum.
   The weight of a burden is felt by the bearer.
   2500. kāval tāṉē pāvaiyarkku aḻaku.
   Chastity is a feminine grace.
   2501. kāvēri āṟṟai maṟippāy kārttikai mātattuk kaṟkaṭaka cantiraṉaiyum
   maṟippāyā?
   You may stay the Cauvery, but can you hinder the full moon of November
   if he be in Cancer ?
   2502. kāvēri kañciyāyp pōṉālum nāy nakkittāṉ kuṭikka vēṇṭum.
   Should the Cauvery become kanji, the dog would partake thereof by
   lapping.
   2503. kāvōlai viḻuntateṉṟu kuruttōlai cirittatām.
   The green leaves of the palm laughed because the dry ones fell off.
   2504. kāḷitōṭṭattuk kaṟpaka virukṣam ārukkum utavātu.
   Even the katpaka tree in the garden of Durga is of no use to man kind.
   The katpaka tree is said to yield whatever a suppliant pay require.
   2505. kāḷippaṭṭam pōṉālum mūḷippaṭṭam pōkātu.
   The name Kali may become obsolete, but not the (nickname) Mooli, the
   earless.
   2506. kāṟ kācup pūṉai mukkāṟ kācut tayiraik kuṭittatu.
   A cat worth a quarter of a cash consumed curds worth three quarters of
   a cash.
   2507. kāṟṟil akappaṭṭa kappal pōl alaikiṉṟatu maṉam.
   The mind is agitated like a ship in a storm.
   2508. kāṟṟukkā maḻaikkā pōrttukkoḷḷa tuṇikkā?
   Is it as a security against the wind and rain that you are thus clad?
   2509. kāṟṟukku etirilē tuppiṉāl mukattilē viḻum.
   If one spit against the wind-the spittle-will strike his own face.
   2510. kāṟṟukkut tōṇi etirttu ōṭātu.
   A dhony cannot sail against the wind.
   2511. kāṟṟum cilarai nīkki vīcumō?
   Will the wind blow so as to avoid certain persons?
   2512. kāṟṟu uḷḷapōtu tūṟṟikkoḷ karumpu uḷḷapōtu āṭṭikkoḷ.
   Winnow when the wind blows, work the sugar-mill when the cane is ripe.
   2513. kāṟṟaip piṭittuk karakattil aṭaikkalāmā ?
   Can one seize the wind and confine it in a small vessel?
   2514. kāṟṟaip pārttuk kappal nāṭṭu.
   Anchor a ship with reference to the wind.
   2515. kāṉalai nīreṉṟu eṇṇi māṉ ōṭi iḷaittatu pōla.
   Like the deer that wearied itself in pursuit of a mirage imagining it
   to be water.
   2516. kiṭakkiṟatu kiṭakkaṭṭum kiḻavaṉai eṭuttu maṇaiyilē vai.
   Leave the things as they are, and take the old man and put him on the
   stool to bathe.
   The first thing done before a corpse is removed from the homestead is
   to bathe it.
   2517. kiṭakkiṟatu kuṭṭiccuvar kaṉāk kāṇkiṟatu maccuvīṭu.
   Dwelling in a ruinous hut and dreaming of a palace.
   2518. kiṭṭa vā nāyē eṉṟāl mūñciyai nakkukiṟatu.
   When called, the dog licks the face.
   2519. kiṭṭāta oṉṟai veṭṭeṉa maṟa.
   Forget at once what cannot be obtained.
   2520. kiṇaṟu veṭṭap pūtam puṟappaṭṭāṟpōl āyiṟṟē.
   It has happened as if a demon had sprung out of a well just dug.
   2521. kiṇaṟum veṭṭit tavaḷaiyum piṭittu viṭukiṟatā?
   What! is it to dig a well and supply it with frogs?
   2522. kiṇaṟu kiṭakka malai kallātē.
   Whilst there is a well do not excavate amountain for water.
   2523. kiṇaṟu veṭṭit tākam tīrkkalāmā?
   Must one dig a well to quench his thirst?
   2524. kiṇaṟu mettiṉāṟ kīḻvarai pociyum.
   If there be water the undermost ring of the well will be wet.
   2525. kiṇaṟu iṟaikka iṟaikkac curakkum.
   The more a well is drawn, the better the spring.
   2526.kiṇaṟu tappit turavil viḻalāmā?
   Having escaped falling into the well, shall we fall into a tank?
   2527. kiṇaṟṟait tūrttāl vayiṟṟait tūrkkum.
   If the well in to be filled up, the belly must be filled up.
   2528. kiṇaṟṟut tavaḷai taṇṇīr kuṭittataik kaṇṭatu ār, kuṭiyātataik
   kaṇṭatu ār ?
   Who knows whether the frog in the well did or did not drink water?
   2529. kiṇaṟṟut tavaḷaikku ēṉ nāṭṭu vaḷappam?
   What has the frog in the wall to do with the news of the country?
   2530. kiṇaṟṟukkut tappit tīyilē pāyntāṉ.
   Having escaped falling into the well he jumped into the fire.
   2531. kiṇaṟṟaik kaṇṭu kaṭal otuṅkippōkumā?
   Will the sea shrink at the sight of a well?
   2532. kiṇaṟṟut taṇṇīrai veḷḷam koṇṭupōkumā ?
   Will the flood carry away the water of the well ?
   2533.kiṇaṟṟilē taṇṇīr utittatu.
   Water sprang up in the well.
   2534. kiṇaṟṟu āḻamum kayiṟṟu nīḷamum pārkkavēṇṭum.
   The depth of the well, and the length of the cord must be ascertained.
   2535. kiṇaṟṟil viḻuntavaṉ maṟupaṭiyum viḻuvāṉā?
   Will he who has fallen into a well once fallinagain?
   2536. kiṇaṟṟil kal pōṭṭatu pōla.
   Like dropping a stone into awell.
   2537. kiṇṭak kiṇṭa ampaṭṭaṉ kuppai mayirē puṟappaṭum.
   The more you dig in the refuse heapof the barber, the more will hair
   turn up.
   2538. kiṇṭak kiṇṭak kīraiyum mayirum.
   The more youdig, the more will greens and hair appear.
   2539. kiraka cāntikkuc cavaram paṇṇik koḷḷukiṟatā?
   Will shaving counteract the evil influence ofaplanet?
   2540. kiriyai aṟṟōṉ maṟai cāṟṟuvatu ēṉ?
   What! is it for an evil-doer to teach religious precepts?
   2541. kirupā natiyē caruvā niti.
   The stream of grace is the source of all treasures.
   2542. kiḻak kuṭalukkuc cōṟum iṭic cuvarukku maṇṇum iṭu.
   Give rice to the aged and add mud to a ruinous wall.
   2543. kiḻap pēccu capaikku ēṟumā?
   Will the words of an old man go up to the assembly?
   2544. kiḻavaṉ āṉālum keṭṭai āṉālum kaṭṭikkoṇṭavaḷ piḻaippāḷ.
   She who marries will do well whether her husband be old or poor.
   2545. kiḻavaṉukku vāḻkkaippaṭukiṟatilum kiṇaṟṟil viḻalām.
   It is better to fall into a well than to marry an old man.
   2546. kiḻavi pēccaik kiṉṉarakkāraṉ kēṭpāṉō?
   Will a musician listen to the speech of an old woman?
   2547. kiḻaviyum kātam kutiraiyum kātam.
   The old woman is a katham from the horse, and the horse a katham from
   the old woman.
   2548. kiḻavi irunta vīṭum kiḷi irunta kāṭum īṭēṟa māṭṭātu.
   Neither the house of an old woman, nor the grove in which there are
   parrots, will be saved from ruin.
   2549. kiḻinta cīlai kācukku iraṇṭu,
   Two rags for a cash.
   2550. kiḻinta pamparam kācukku iraṇṭu.
   Two split tops for a cash.
   2551. kiḷiyai vaḷarttup pūṉai kaiyil koṭukkalāmā?
   Is it proper to train a parrot and give it into the paw of acat?
   2552. kiḷiyaippōlap pēccum mayilaippōla naṭaiyum.
   Speech like that of a parrot, gait like that of a peacock.
   2553. kiḷḷap paḻukkumām kiḷi iruntu koñcumām.
   It is said that it ripens by being pinched, and that parrots will
   nibble it leisurely.
   2554. kiḷḷuvārkīḻ iruppatilum aḷḷuvārkīḻ irukkalām.
   One may endure those who rob, but not those who pilfer.
   2555. kīri kaṭitta pāmpupōlē.
   Like a snake bit by a mungoose.
   2556. kīrikkum pāmpukkum tīrāp pakai.
   Inveterate enmity exists between the mungoose and snakes.
   2557. kīriyum pāmpum pōla.
   Like a mungoose and a snake.
   2558. kīraik kaṭaikkum etirkaṭai vēṇṭum.
   An opposition shop is good even among green grocers.
   2559. kīraikkup pulluruvi kīḻē muḷaittāṟpōlē.
   As if a parasite should spring from the lower part of a vegetable.
   2560. kīraik kaṭṭai veṭṭac coṉṉāl tōraṇam kaṭṭukiṟatā?
   When I order the greens to be pruned, is a garland put up?
   2561. kīrait taṇṭu piṭuṅka ēlēlappāṭṭu ēṉ?
   Why sing elela when plucking up greens?
   2562. kīraiyai iraṇṭu kaṟi paṇṇātē.
   Do not make two curries of a vegetable.
   2563. kīrttiyāl paci tīrumā?
   Will hunger be appeased by fame?
   2564. kīrtti peṟṟum kilēcam eṉṉa?
   Whence sorrow to himwho has obtained praise?
   2565. kīḻē pāmpu eṉṟāl mēlē pārkkiṟāṉ.
   If it is said that a snake is below, he looks up.
   2566. kīḻkulattāṉ āṉālum kaṟṟavaṉ mēlkulattāṉ.
   Though of low origin, the learned ranks with the highest class.
   2567. kīḻkkātu mēṟkātu mūḷi, caṇṭaikku raṇapattirakāḷi.
   Her ears are rent at both ends; in an affray she is equal to Durga.
   2568. kīṟi āṟṟiṉāl puṇ āṟum.
   If lanced, the sore will heal.
   2569. kuṅkiliyat tūpam kāṭṭic caṉṉatam kulaintāl kumpiṭu eṅkē ?
   If indeed the incense has expelled the demon, where is the sign?
   -uplifted hands.
   2570. kuṅkumam cumanta kaḻutai parimaḷam aṟiyumā?
   Can the ass which carried the kungumam-a fragrant resin-appreciate
   scents?
   2571.kuṅkumak kōtaikku añcu paṇam, kuruṭṭuk kaṇṇikkum, añcu paṇamā?
   The donation to the perfumed dame being five fanams, is five fanams to
   be assigned
   to the blind woman, also?
   2572. kuñcirippukku maruntu cāppiṭa uḷḷa cirippum pōṉāṟ pōla.
   As if one lost his natural smile by taking medicine to induce a
   şimpering expression.
   2573. kuṭattil ēṟṟiya viḷakku.
   A lamp lit in an earthen pot.
   2574. kuṭattil poṉ kūttu āṭumā?
   Will gold in a pot dance?
   2575. kuṭappāl kaṟantālum kutirai ōṭṭam ōṭamāṭṭātu.
   Though the cow gives a large pot of milk, it is not equal to the horse
   in speed.
   2576. kuṭappāl kaṟantālum kūrai piṭuṅkukiṟa māṭu ākātu.
   Though it may yield a large pot of milk, a cow that destroys the roof
   is not desirable.
   2577. kuṭam taṇṇīriṟ koḷḷi vaittāṟpōla.
   As if a firebrand were put into a pot of water.
   2578. kuṭalum kūntalum koṇṭatu koḷkai.
   Habit is the rule of the stomach and the hair.
   2579. kuṭal kūḻukku aḻukiṟatām koṇṭai pūvukku aḻukiṟatām.
   It is said that the stomach cries for gruel, and the tresses for
   flowers.
   2580. kuṭal aṟunta nari entamaṭṭum ōṭum ?
   How far can a jackal run after its bowels are dislodged ?
   2581. kuṭal aṟunta kōḻi eṅkē pōkum?
   Whither will a fowl go after its entrails have been exposed?
   2582. kuṭi iruntu aṟi vaḻi naṭantu aṟi.
   Learn the character of a person by dwelling with him, and the condition
   of a road by
   walking in it.
   2583. kuṭi iruntu pār kūṭṭuppayir iṭṭup pār.
   Test his social qualities by living with him, and his honesty byjoint
   tillage.
   2584. kuṭi iruppatu kuccuvīṭu, kaṉāk kaṇṭatu maccumāḷikai.
   He who dwells ina humble cottage dreams ofceiled apartments.
   2585. kuṭi illā vīṭṭiṟ kuṇṭup peruccāḷi ulāvum.
   Bandycootes will run about in an uninhabited house.
   2586. kuṭi illā ūrilē aṭi iṭa ākātu.
   It is a risk to set a foot in an uninhabited village.
   2587. kuṭi illā ūrukku nari irācaṉ.
   A jackal is king in a deserted village.
   2588. kuṭi uṭaiyāṉē muṭi uṭaiyāṉ.
   He is fit for kingship who is approved by the people.
   2589. kuṭikkiṟatu kūḻāk koppaḷikkiṟatu paṉṉīrām.
   He has gruel to drink, and washes his mouth with rose water.
   2590. kuṭikkiṟa pālai veṭippilē vārkkiṟatā?
   What, is it to pour down the drinkable milk into a crevice?
   2591. kuṭikkiṟatu kāṭi nīr, ataṟkut taṅkavaṭṭilā ?
   What you drink is sour gruels, do you require a cup of fine gold for
   it?
   2592. kuṭikkiṟatu kūḻām irukkiṟatu ciṅkācaṉamām.
   Living on gruel and sitting on a throne.
   2593. kuṭikkiṟa vīṭu viṭiyumā?
   Will the family of a drunkard prosper?
   2594. kuṭittaṉamō turaittaṉamō etu peritu?
   Whether is greater, the government of a family or of a state ?
   2595. kuṭittaṉam mēliṭa vēṇṭi piṭāriyaip peṇṭuvaittuk koṇṭāṉ.
   Wishing to elevate his family he married a Pidari-village goddess.
   2596. kuṭittaṉameṉṟu paṇṇiṉāl naṉmaiyum varum tīmaiyum varum.
   If one becomes a householder, he must expect both good and evil.
   2597. kuṭipōṉa vīṭṭilē vaṟaṭṭu nāy kāttatu pōla.
   As a lean dog watched a deserted house.
   2598. kuṭimatam aṭipaṭat tīrum.
   The madness of a drunkard may be cured by beating.
   2599. kuṭiyaṉum veṟiyaṉum cari.
   A drunkard and a mad man are alike.
   2600. kuṭiyāta vīṭu viṭiyātu.
   The family of a drunkard is always benighted.
   2601. kuṭiyiṟ peṇ vayiṟu erintāl koṭiyiṟ cēlai niṉṟu eriyum.
   If the bowels of the house-wife burn, her cloth hanging on the line
   will burn also.
   2602. kuṭiyillā ūrilē oṟṟaip paṇakkāraṉ.
   He is the only wealthy man in a deserted village.
   2603. kuṭiyiṟ piṟantu kuraṅku āṭṭam āṭutal.
   Born in a good family, and playing the monkey.
   2604. kuṭiyiṟ piṟantu ceṭiyil viḻuntāṉ.
   Born in a good family and falling into a bush.
   2605. kuṭi vaittuk koṇṭāyō koḷḷi vaittuk koṇ ṭāyō?
   Have you taken a family to dwell with you ? Or have you taken
   firebrands?
   2606. kuṭi vaitta vīṭṭiṟ koḷḷi vaikkalāmā?
   Is it proper to burn down a house after admitting a family?
   2607. kuṭṭik kiṭaiyilē ōṉāy pukuntatupōl.
   As a wolf entered a fold of lambs.
   2608. kuṭṭik kalakam paṇṇukiṟavaṉ kuṭṭuppaṭṭuc cāvāṉ.
   He who breeds divisions in a family shall be cuffed to death.
   2609. kuṭṭik karaṇam pōṭṭālum lōpaṉ koṭāṉ .
   The miser will give nothing though you tumble heels overhead.
   2610. kuṭṭic cuvarilē tēḷ koṭṭa, kaṭṭut taṟiyilē neṟi iṭumā?
   If a scorpion sting in a ruinous dwarf wall, will the glandular
   swelling appear in the
   stall?
   2611. kuṭṭic cuvarilē tēḷ koṭṭat taṇṇīr miṭāvilē neṟi kaṭṭumā?
   Does the sting of a scorpion in a ruinouswall, produce a glandular
   swelling in a water-pot?
   2612. kuṭṭic cuvarai muṭṭa veḷḷeḻuttā?
   Is he so dim-sighted as to stumble against a ruinous wall ?
   2613. kuṭṭi pōṭṭa pūṉai pōl alaikiṟāṉ.
   He wanders about like a cat that has kittened.
   2614. kuṭṭiṉa kuṭṭum kuṇṭiṟ pāynta taṇṇīrum varumā?
   Can a cuff already inflicted and water that has run into a pit be
   recalled?
   2615. kuṭṭi āṭu koḻuttālum vaḻuvaḻuppup pōkātu.
   Though it become fat, the flesh of a kid is always clammy.
   2616. kuṭṭi kulaittu nāypēril vaikkiṟatu pōla.
   Like pups barking and creating a quarrel among dogs.
   2617. kuṭṭi nāykoṇṭu vēṭṭai āṭiṉatupōla.
   Like hunting with pups.
   2618. kuṭṭu māṉam tappik kucavaṉōṭē pēciṉāl, caṭṭaiyum paṇṇāṉ, caṭṭiyum
   koṭāṉ.
   Ifyou speak familiarly with a potter, he will not respect you, nor will
   he supply you with chatties.
   2619. kuṇattai māṟṟak kuru illai.
   No guroo- religious teacher-can change a man's temperament.
   A Guru among the Hindus is regarded as a spiritual parent from whom the
   youth receives the initiatory mantra or prayer, and whoconducts the
   ceremonies necessaryat various seasons of infancy andyouth, up to the
   period of in vestiture with the sacred thread or string:this person may
   be the natural parent or the religions preceptor. The word Guru is also
   used for a teacher or preceptor generally.
   2620. kuṇattiṟku aḻukiṟatā, piṇattiṟku aḻukiṟatā ?
   Is the weeping on account of the virtue of the deceased or does it
   relate to his corpse?
   2621. kuṇam uṟṟavaṉ maṇam uṟṟavaṉ, kuṇam aṟṟavaṉ maṇam aṟṟavaṉ.
   A good-natured man has an engaging exterior, an ill-natured man has a
   repulsive aspect.
   2622. kuṇam pāti koṇṭa nōvu pāti.
   His suffering is due partly to his faint-heartedness, and partly to a
   disease.
   2623. kuṇṭāk karaṇam pōṭṭālum piṇṭāc cōṟṟukku vaḻi illai.
   Though he makes somersaults to all he sees, he has no food to eat.
   2624. kuṇṭi kāyntāl kutiraiyum vaikkōl tiṉṉum.
   If starved even a horse will eat straw.
   2625. kuṇṭi ettaṉai kōṇaṟ kōṇiṉālum cumai vīṭṭiṟ pōyc cērntālē cari.
   No matter how the body may be bent if the burden be carried home.
   2626. kuṇṭi aṟunta paruntu pōla.
   Like a kite witha broken tail.
   2627. kuṇṭuc caṭṭiyilē kutirai ōṭṭukiṟāṉ.
   He displays his horsemanship in an earthen pot.
   2628. kuṇṭu paṭṭuc cākātavaṉ vaṇṭu kaṭittuc cettāṉām.
   It is said that he who survived a gunshot wound, died of the bite of an
   insect.
   2629. kuṇṭuc caṭṭiyiṟ karaṇam pōṭalāmā?
   Can one turn a somersault in an earthen pot ?
   2630. kuṇṭup peruccāḷiyum vaṇṭu pōla.
   The bandycoote is also like a beetle.
   2631. kuṇṭu collukiṟavaṉukku iru nākku kaṭṭuviriyaṉukkum irunākku.
   A slanderer and a snake of deadly poison have each two tongues.
   2632. kuṇṭai palattāl kuṭi palakkum.
   As kine increase, a household increases.
   2633. kuti kuti eṉpārkaḷ ellārum, kūṭak kutippār illai.
   They will all say leap, leap into the pyre, but there is none willing
   to leap with me.
   2634. kutittuk kutittu mā iṭittālum puḻukkaikku oru koḻukkaṭṭaiyē.
   Though she may leap joyously and pound the grain, the slave woman gets
   but one
   cake.
   2635. kutirai kuruṭāṉālum koḷḷut tiṉkiṟatiṟ kuṟaiccal illai.
   Though blind, the horse does not eat the less grain.
   2636. kutirai koṇṭāl kaliṉattukku vaḻakkā?
   When you have bought the horse, is there any occasion for disputing
   about its bit?
   2637. kutiraiyiṉ kuṇam aṟintallavō tampirāṉ kompu koṭukkavillai?
   Was it not because the Creator knew the nature of the horse that he did
   not provide
   him with horns?
   2638. kutirai cettatallāmaṟ cēṇam cumakka vēlai āyiṟṟu.
   Besides the death of the horse there is the saddle also to be carried.
   2639. kutiraikkum nāykkum kuṭipōkac cantōṣam.
   The horse and the dog like a change of place.
   2640. kutirai ēṟa atiṣṭam iruntāl kuṇṭiyiṉ kīḻ vantu nuḻaiyātā ?
   If it be your good fortune to ride, will not your horse come and place
   itself under your
   seat?
   2641. kutirai nallatutāṉ cuḻi keṭṭatu.
   It is certainly a good horse, but its circular marks are bad.
   The circlets of hair on a horse are generally observed by dealers and
   owners very carefully.
   2642. kutirai ēṟi eṉṉa , kōṇak kompu ūti eṉṉa, vīṇarkkum kīrttikkum
   veku tūram.
   What if you do ride a horse, and have a hora blown before you?
   There is a great distance between the worthless and reputation.
   2643. kutirai pākaṉait taḷḷuvatum allāmal kuḻiyum tōṇṭukiṟatām.
   It is said that the horse has not only thrown its rider, but is digging
   his grave.
   2644. kutirai cettatu allāmal kuḻi tōṇṭa mūṉṟu paṇamā ?
   Besides losing the horse, have I to pay three fanams to bury him ?
   2645. kutiraiyum kātam kiḻaviyum kātam.
   The horse is ten miles before you, and the old woman is ten miles
   behind you.
   2646. kutirai piṭikkac cammaṭṭi aṭikka kūppiṭṭak kuralukku ēṉeṉṉa.
   You will attend to my horse, ply the sledge hammer and answer my calls.
   2647. kutirai iruppu aṟiyum koṇṭa peṇṭāṭṭi kuṇam aṟivāḷ.
   The horse knows his rider, and a wife her husband.
   2648. kutti vaṭittālum campā kuppaiyilē pōṭṭālum taṅkam.
   Though pounded and boiled it is samba-superior rice-though cast on the
   rubbish
   heap it is gold.
   2649. kuttuppaṭṭup poṟuttālum kuṟaivayiṟu poṟukkumā?
   A cuff may be borne, can hunger?
   2650. kunti iruntu tiṉṟāl kuṉṟu māḷum.
   If you eat properly seated you may consume a heap of rice.
   2651. kupēraṉ paṭṭaṇattilum viṟaku cumakkiṟavaṉ uṇṭu.
   Even in the city of Kuberan there were firewood carriers.
   2652. kupēraṉ paṭṭaṇam koḷḷai pōṉālum atiṣṭavīṉaṉukku akappaik kāmpum
   akappaṭumā?
   Though the city of Kuberan be despoiled, will the unfortunate obtain
   even the handle of a wooden spoon?
   2653. kuppuṟa viḻuntu tavam ceytālum kurukkaḷukku mōṭcam illai.
   Though they may prostrate themselves and perform penance, religious
   teachers do not attain heaven.
   2654. kuppuṟa viḻuntum mīcaiyilē maṇ paṭavillai eṉkiṟāṉ.
   Though he fell flat on his face, he says that his mustache did not
   touch the ground.
   2655. kuppaiyil muḷaitta kīrai kappalukkuk kālākumā?
   Will a plant grown on a dunghill answer for the mast of a ship?
   2656. kuppaiyil muḷaitta koṭi kūraiyil ēṟiṉatupōla.
   As a creeper springing on a dunghill climbed on a roof.
   2657. kuppaiyiṉṟip payir viḷaiyātu.
   Without manure the growing grain will not yield a good crop.
   2658. kuppaiyiṟ kiṭantālum kuṉṟimaṇi kuṉṟimaṇitāṉ.
   Though it lies on the dunghill the kunrimani-abrus precatoriusremains
   unchanged.
   2659. kuppaiyiṟ putaittālum kuṉṟimaṇi niṟam pōkātu.
   Though the kunrimani be buried in the dunghill its colour will not
   change.
   2660. kuppai uyarntatu kōpuram tāḻntatu.
   The rubbish heap has risen, the tower has sunk.
   2661. kuppai uyarntateṉṉa kōpuram tāḻntateṉṉa?
   How is it that the rubbish heap has risen, and the tower sunk?
   2662. kuppaiyum kōḻiyum pōlak kuruvum cīṣaṉum.
   The teacher and his disciple are like the dunghill and the fowl.
   2663. kumari oru piḷḷai kōṭi oru veḷḷai .
   A woman is young till she bears a child, and cloth is new till it is
   washed.
   2664. kumari taṉivaḻiyē pōṉālum koṭṭāvi taṉivaḻiyē pōkātu.
   Though a young woman may go on her way alone, yawning is never alone.
   2665. kumariyāy irukkaiyiṟ koṇṭāṭṭam kiḻaviyāy irukkiṟa pōtu tiṇṭāṭṭam.
   When young, a woman is full of hilarity, when old her portion is
   vexation.
   2666. kumpiṭṭuk kaṭaṉ koṭātē kumpiṭṭuk kaṭaṉ vāṅkātē.
   Neither lend nor borrow beseechingly.
   2667. kumpiṭap pōṉa iṭattil kōyil iṭintu viḻuntatu.
   When I went to worship the temple fell.
   2668. kumpiṭap pōṉa teyvam kuṟukkē vantatupōl.
   As the deity one went to worship came to meet one cross wise.
   2669. kumpiṭṭa teyvam kulateyvam.
   The deity I worship is my hereditary deity.
   2670. kumpiṭum kaḷḷar kuḻaintiṭum kaḷḷar.
   Obsequious rogues, deceitful friends.
   2671. kuyavaṉukkup pala nāḷai vēlai, taṭi aṭikāraṉukku oru nimiṣa
   vēlai.
   That which cost the potter many days labour, is but the labour of a
   moment to the
   breaker.
   2672. kuyavā kalacam koṇṭuvā , iṭaiyā pāl koṭu eṉṟāl pōla.
   Like saying to the potter bring a vessel, and to the shepherd fill it
   with milk.
   2673. kuyil kūviṉāṟpōla.
   Like the warbling of the Indian cuckoo.
   2674. kuyiṟ kuralum mayil aḻakum pōla.
   Like the voice of the Indian cuckoo, and the beauty of the peacock.
   2675. kuraṅkiṉ kaip pūmālai.
   A garland of flowers in the hand of a monkey.
   2676. kuraṅkukkup putti collit tūkkaṇaṅkuruvi kūṇṭu iḻantatu.
   The advice which the pendulous bird Loxia, gave to the monkey ended in
   the destruction of its own nest.
   2677. kuraṅkukkum taṉ kuṭṭi poṉ kuṭṭi.
   Even to the monkey its own young is precious.
   2678. kuraṅkup puṇ āṟātu.
   A sore on a monkey never heals.
   2679. kuraṅkup puṇ piramāṇṭam.
   A sore of the monkey is enormously large.
   2680. kuraṅkup piṇamum kuṟap piṇamum kaṇṭavar illai.
   No one ever saw the dead body of a monkey, or the corpse of a kuravan-a
   mountaineer.
   2681. kuraṅku taṉ kuṭṭiyiṉ kaiyaikkoṇṭu patam pārkkiṟatu pōlap
   pārkkiṟāṉ.
   He tests it by another as a monkey tests an object by the hand of its
   young.
   2682. kuraṅkup piṭipōl piṭikkavēṇṭum.
   Lay hold of a thing as firmly as a monkey.
   2683. kuraṅkiṉ pīyai maruntukkuk kēṭṭāl koppu kiḷai ellāmtattippāyum.
   If a monkey be asked for his droppings for medicinal purposes, he will
   leap from branch to branch.
   2684. kuraṅku ellām oru mukam.
   All monkeys have faces alike.
   2685. kuraṅku āṉālum kulattil koḷḷavēṇṭum.
   Though she be a mere monkey, one should take a wife in one's own tribe.
   2686. kuraṅku ēṟāta kompu uṇṭā ?
   Is there a branch the monkey has not climbed?
   2687. kuraṅku ellām kūṭṭam kūṭṭamāka irukkum.
   All monkeys go about in troops.
   2688. kuraṅkiṉ kaiyil koḷḷi akappaṭṭa katai.
   The story of a firebrand in the hand of a monkey.
   2689. kuru illāta cīṣaṉ uṇṭā ?
   Is there a disciple without a Guru-teacher?
   2690. kuru illārkku vittaiyum illai mutal illārkku lāpamum illai.
   There is no art without a teacher, and no profit without capital.
   2691. kuru eṉa vantāṉ tiru urai tantāṉ.
   He came as a Guru; he gave sacred instruction.
   2692. kurukkaḷ piḻaittatu maṟupiṟappu.
   The escape of the religious teacher was as it were a second birth.
   2693. kuruṭaṉ kaiyil vilāṅku akappaṭṭatu pōla.
   As an eel was caught in the hand of a blind man.
   2694. kuruṭaṉukku vēṇṭiyatu kōl.
   The need of a blind man is a staff.
   2695. kuruṭaṉukku vēṇṭiyatu kaṇ.
   What the blind want is eye-sight.
   2696. kuruṭaṉukkuk kuruṭaṉ kōl piṭikkalāmā?
   Can the blind lead the blind with a staff ?
   2697. kuruṭaṉ āṭu mēykka eṭṭāḷukku vēlaiyā?
   Is it a work for eight men to help a blind man to feed sheep?
   2698. kuruṭaṉ kūttup pārkkap pōṉāl payaṉ eṉṉa?
   What advantage will the blind man gain by attending a comedy?
   2699. kuruṭaṉukkup pāl kokkup pōṉṟatu.
   To the blind milk was like a heron.
   2700. kuruṭaṉ peṇṭāṭṭi kūṉaṉōṭu uṟavāṭiṉāḷ.
   The wife of a blind man became intimate with a hunch-backed man.
   2701. kuruṭaṉ peṇṭirai aṭittāṟpōla.
   As if a blind man bent his wife.
   2702. kuruṭaṉaip pārttu irāca viḻi viḻikkac coṉṉāl viḻippāṉā?
   If requested to assume the looks of, a king, can a blind man do so?
   2703. kuruṭaṉai nōṭṭam pārkkac coṉṉāṟpōla.
   As if a blind man was asked to assay metals.
   2704. kuruṭaṉ kaik kōlaip piṭuṅkiṉatupōla.
   Like snatching away the staff of the blind.
   2705. kuruṭaṉukku kuruṭaṉ vaḻi kāṭṭiṉāl iruvarum kuḻiyilē viḻuvār.
   If the blind lead the blind, both willfall into the pit.
   2706. kuruṭi taṇṇīrkkup pōka eṭṭāḷ miṉa keṭṭatu pōl.
   As the work of eight persons was stopped by reason of a blindwoman
   going to fetch
   water.
   2707. kuruṭum ceviṭum kūttup pārttatu pōla.
   As the blind and the deaf attending comedy.
   2708. kuruṭṭuk kutiraikkuc caṟukkiṉatu cākku.
   The excuse of a blind horse was his stumbling.
   2709. kuruṭṭup pūṉai viṭṭattiṟ pāyntatu pōla.
   As a blind cat leaped on the cross beam.
   2710. kuruṭṭukkokkiṟku ūrkkuḷamē cāṭci.
   The village tank is the witness of the blind crane.
   2711. kuruṭṭuk kōḻi taviṭṭukku vīṅkiyatu pōla.
   As a blind fowl wasover-anxious to feed on bran.
   2712. kuruṭṭuk kaṇṇukkuk kuṟuṇi mai iṭṭu āvatu eṉṉa?
   Why adorn blind eyes with collyrium?
   2713. kuru moḻi kēḷātavaṉum tāy vārttaikku aṭaṅkātavaṉum caṇṭi.
   He who will not hear the words of his Guru-religious teacher-and he who
   disobeys his mother, are worthless.
   2714. kuru moḻi maṟantōṉ tiruvaḻintu aḻivāṉ.
   He who forgets the words of his Guru will forfeit the divine favor and
   perish.
   2715. kuruviyiṉ kaḻuttilē paṉaṅkāyaik kaṭṭit tūkkalāmā?
   Cana palmyra fruit be suspended from the neck of a small bird ?
   2716. kuruvikkut takka irāma attiram allavō?
   Is not the weapon of Rama suited to the bird?
   2717. kuruvikkut takka rāmēcuram.
   Rameswaram suited to the bird.
   This is I think a perversion of the foregoing proverb. An aged old
   feeble person may say, my Rameswaram, pilgrimage, efforts, must be
   moderate.
   2718. kuruvikkut takka pāram.
   A burden suited to the bird.
   2719. kuruvik kūṭṭaik kōlāṟ kalaikkātē.
   Never disturb the nest of a bird with a stick.
   2720. kuruvukku miñciṉa cīṣaṉā?
   Is there a disciple who is above his Guru ?
   2721. kuruvukku nāmam kuḻaittuppōṭuvāṉ.
   He will deceive his own Guru.
   2722. kuruvukkut turōkam ceytālum kuṭalukkut turōka ceyyakkūṭātu.
   Though a Guru may be deceived, the stomach cannot.
   2723. kuru vēṣam koṇṭavaṉ ellām kuru āvāṉā?
   Are all religious teachers who have assumed the garb?
   2724. kulattaik keṭutta kōṭālikkāmpu.
   The handle of an axe that destroyed its own species.
   The tree from which its handle was taken, was felled by the axe.
   2725. kulattaik keṭukkumām kuraṅku.
   It is said that a monkey will destroy its own species.
   2726. kulamakaṭku aḻaku taṉ koḻunaṉaip pēṇutal.
   It becomes a lawful wife to honour her husband.
   2727. kulamakaṉ kulattukku aḻuvāṉ, mūkkaṟaiyaṉ mūkkukkuaḻuvāṉ.
   The high-born mourns the loss of caste, and the man who has lost his
   nose, his nose.
   2728. kulamum oṉṟu kuṟiyum oṉṟu.
   Birth and external sign are at variance.
   2729. kulam pukuntum kuṟai tīravillai.
   Though he has entered another tribe he is still in want.
   2730. kulam kulattōṭē veḷḷam āṟṟōṭē.
   Tribe goes with tribe, the flood with the river.
   2731. kulam kulattōṭē veḷḷāṭu taṉṉōṭē.
   A tribe associates with its own tribe, and goats follow their own kind.
   2732. kulam kuppaiyilē paṇam pantiyilē.
   High birth lies on the dunghill, while wealth is at the festive board.
   2733. kulavittai kaṟṟup pāti kallāmaṟ pāti.
   Arts appropriate to a family are partly intuitive and partly acquired.
   2734. kulaikkiṟa nāy kaṭikka aṟiyātu.
   A barking dog does not bite.
   2735. kulaikkiṟa nāykku elumpaip pōṭṭāṟpōla.
   Like throwing a bone to a barking dog.
   2736. kulaikkiṟa nāy vēṭṭai piṭikkumā?
   Will a barking dog avail in hunting?
   2737. kulaikkiṟa nāyiṉ vāyilē kōlaik koṭuttāl ūr eṅkum koṇṭōṭik
   kulaikkum.
   If a staff be put into the mouth of a noisy dog, it will carry it
   through the village barking.
   2738. kulaiyāta nāy kutiṅkālaik kaṭikkum.
   A silent dog will bite the heels.
   2739. kuḻantai paṭṭiṉiyum kōyil paṭṭiṉiyum illai.
   Infants and temple servants do not suffer from hunger.
   2740. kuḻantaikkum nāykkum kuṭipōkac cantōṣam.
   Children and dogs are pleased with a change of place.
   2741. kuḻantaiyum teyvamum koṇṭāṭiṉa iṭattilē.
   Children and gods best agree with their admirers.
   2742. kuḻantaik kāyccalum kuṇṭaṉi kāyccalum pollātu.
   The fever of children and the spite of a slanderer are bad.
   2743. kuḻantai tūṅkukiṟatu ellām ammaiyārukku ilāpam.
   The sleep of a child is advantageous to the mother.
   2744. kuḻantaiyiṉ tēkampōl.
   Tender as the body of aninfant.
   2745. kuḻantāy kuḻiyil amiḻntātē.
   My child, do not sink into the pit.
   2746.kuḻappaṭi kaṇṭu tiraikaṭal ēṅkumā ?
   Has the stormy weather set the whole sea in motion?
   2747. kuḻampup pāl kuṭikkavum kumarā kaṇṭavaliyā?
   O my youthful son, is your throat pained by drinking thick milk?
   2748. kuḻiyiṟ payirai eṭuttuk kūraimēl iṭalāmā?
   Is it right to train a parasite to the roof?
   2749.kuḻiyiṟ piḷḷaiyai nari cuṟṟukiṟāppōlē.
   Likea jackal going round the grave of a child.
   2750. kuḷattaik kalakkip paruntukku irai iṭalāmā?
   Is it proper to agitate the tank to supply prey for kites?
   2751. kuḷattukku maḻai kuntāṇiyā?
   Are rain drops the weight of a mortar to a tank?
   2752. kuḷattiṟ pōṭṭuk kiṇaṟṟil tēṭalāmā ?
   Having put it into the tank, do you seek it in the well?
   2753. kuḷattōṭu kōpittuk kāl kaḻuvātavaṉ pōl.
   Like the man who would not wash his feet in the tank because he was
   angry with it.
   2754. kuḷap paṭi nīr iṟaittālum kaṭaṟ paḷḷam nirampumā?
   Will the hollowof the sea be filled by draining a tank down to the
   lowest step?
   2755. kuḷam uṭaintu pōkumpōtu muṟai vītamā?
   When a tank bursts, do they dispute about turns?
   2756. kuḷam kākkiṟavaṉ taṇṇīraik kuṭiyāṉō ?
   Will not he who watches the tank drink?
   2757. kuḷam vaṟṟiyum muṟai vītam uṇṭā ?
   Why dispute about your turn for drawing water seeing that the tank is
   dried up?
   2758. kuḷam veṭṭu muṉṉē mutalai kuṭi irukkumā?
   Before the tank is dug will the alligator go to dwell therein ?
   2759. kuḷavik kūṭṭaik kōlāl kulaittāṟpōla.
   Like poking a wasp's nest with a stick.
   2760. kuḷavik kūṭṭilē kallu viṭṭu eṟikiṟatā?
   What! throw a stone at a wasp's nest?
   2761. kuḷavikkup paccaip puḻu piḷḷai.
   A green caterpillar is the offspring of a wasp.
   2762. kuḷavi puḻuvait taṉ niṟam ākkuvatu pōla.
   Like a wasp changing worms to its own colour.
   2763. kuḷikkap pōyc cēṟṟaip pūcikkoṇṭatu pōla.
   As one smeared himself with mud after bathing.
   2764. kuḷirnta koḷḷiyāy iruntu kuṭiyaik keṭukkalāmā?
   Pretending to be an extinguished firebrand, is it proper to destroy the
   house ?
   2765. kuḷḷap pārppāṉ paḷḷattil viḻuntāṉ taṇṭu eṭu taṭi eṭu.
   The dwarf Brahman has fallen into a pit, take a staff, take a stick.
   2766. kuḷḷaṉaik koṇṭu āḻam pārkkiṟāṉ.
   He sounds the depth by means of a dwarf.
   2767. kuḷḷaṉ kuṭi keṭuppāṉ kuḷḷaṉ peṇcāti ūraik keṭuppāḷ.
   A dwarf will destroy a family; his wife will destroy the whole village.
   2768. kuṟatti piḷḷai peṟṟāl kuṟavaṉ kāyam tiṉpāṉ.
   If the wife of a mountaineer is brought to bed, her husband takes the
   prescribed stimulant.
   2769. kuṟa vaḻakkum iṭai vaḻakkum koñcattil tīrātu.
   Disputes among mountaineers and shepherds are not easily settled.
   2770. kuṟa vaḻakkukkuc cakkili vaḻakku ilēcu.
   Disputes among chakliyars are more easily settled than those among
   mountaineers.
   2771. kuṟuṇip pāl kaṟantapōtilum kūrai piṭuṅkap pārttirukkalāmā?
   May one suffer his cow to destroy his roof although she yields a kuruni
   of milk at a meal ?
   2772. kuṟuṇi maitāṉ iṭṭālum kuruṭu kuruṭē.
   Though a kuruni of collyrium be applied to the eyes of the blind, the
   blindness remains.
   2773. kuṟumpiyuḷḷa kātu tiṉavu tiṉṉum.
   A ceruminous ear will itch.
   2774. kuṟumpait tavirkkum kuṭitāṅki.
   The supporter who puts an end to inhuman acts.
   2775. kuṟai aṟak kaṟṟavaṉ kōṭiyil oruvaṉ.
   A thoroughly learned man is one of a lac.
   2776. kuṟai kuṭam taḷampum niṟai kuṭam taḷampātu.
   A water pot not full is agitated, a full pot is not.
   2777. kuṟaiyac colli niṟaiya aḷa.
   Give more than you profess to sell.
   2778. kuṟaiyuḷḷōrkku uṇṭu kuṟāvutal kaṟaiyuḷḷōrkku uṇṭu karavu.
   The guilty are dejected, those that have a tarnished reputation elude
   observation.
   2279. kuṟai vēlaiyaik kurukkaḷukkum kāṭṭal ākātu.
   An unfinished work ought not to be shown even to a Guru-master.
   2780. kuṟai vēlaiyai ampalattiṟ koṇṭuvaralāmā?
   Is it proper to expose an unfinished work for sale or otherwise ?
   2781. kuṟṟamuḷḷa neñcu kuṟukuṟu eṉṉum kuṟumpiyuḷḷa kātu tiṉavu tiṉṉum.
   A guilty conscience is agitated, a foul ear itches.
   2782. kuṟṟam maṟaippatil maṟṟoru kuṟṟamum nērum.
   By concealing one fault another may arise.
   2783. kuṟṟa maṉaccāṭci kūṭi vāḻ catturu.
   A guilty conscience is an enemy that lives with its possessor.
   2784. kuṟṟam aṭainta kīrtti kuṇaṅkoḷvatu aritu.
   Distinction attained by wrong makes reformation difficult.
   2785. kuṟṟat taṇṭaṉaiyilum cutta taṇṭaṉai nallatu.
   Undeserved punishment is better than deserved punishment.
   2786. kuṟṟam pārkkiṟ cuṟṟam illai.
   If every fault be noticed, all intercourse must cease.
   2787. kuṉṟimaṇikkum kuṇṭiyiṟ kaṟuppu.
   Even a kunrimani seed-abrus precatorius-has a black spot on it.
   2788. kūkaikkup pakalil kaṇ teriyātu.
   An owl cannot see in the day-time.
   2789. kūkai viḻittāṟpōla viḻikkiṟāṉ.
   He stares like an owl.
   2790. kūṭak kuṭi iruntu koṇṭu koḷḷa corukalāmā?
   Whilst residing with one shall we thrust a firebrand into his house?
   2791. kūṭattaik koṭuttālum māṭattaik koṭukkal ākātu.
   Although you may give an outer room, it is not proper to give an inner
   one.
   2792. kūṭam oṉṟu pōṭumuṉṉē , cutti iraṇṭu pōṭum.
   Before the big hammer strikes one, the little hammer strikes two.
   2793. kūṭam iṭittāl māṭam.
   If the party-wall be broken down, one room only will remain.
   2794. kūṭi iruntu kulāvuvār vīṭṭil ōṭi uṇṇum kūḻum iṉitē.
   Gruel served in the house of a united family is enjoyable.
   2795. kūṭṭattiṟ kaṭṭuccōṟu aviḻttatupōla.
   As food prepared for a journey was untied in a crowd.
   2796. kūṭṭōṭē pōccutu kuḷirum kāyccalum.
   Shivering and fever left with the body.
   2797. kūṇṭilē kuṟuṇi nel iruntāl mūlaiyilē mukkuṟuṇit teyvam kūttāṭum.
   When there is a kuruni of paddy in the bin, three kurunies of gods will
   be dancing in a corner.
   2798. kūttarici kuttukiṟa vīṭṭil vāykku aricikku vaḻi irātu.
   In the house where rice is pounded for sale, there is not enough to pot
   into the mouth of a corpse.
   Before a corpse is removed the females of the family place a little raw
   rice near the mouth, the males do the same in the cemetry before the
   body is laid on the pyre.
   2799. kūttāṭṭuc cilampam paṭaiveṭṭukku ākumā?
   Will the art of fencing avail in a battle-field ?
   2800.kūttāṭikkuk kīḻē kaṇ kūlikkāraṉukku mēlē kaṇ.
   A rope-dancer directs his eye downwards, one who bears a burden
   upwards.
   2801. kūttikku iṭṭuk kuraṅku āṉāṉ vēcikku iṭṭu viṟaku āṉāṉ.
   By wasting his substanceon concubines he has become spare as a monkey,
   and by giving to common women he has become as dry as a stick.
   2802. kūttip piḷḷaikkut takappaṉ ār?
   Who is the legal father of the child of a concubine?
   2803.kūttiyār āttāḷ cettāl koṭṭum muḻakkum kūttiyār cettāl oṉṟum illai.
   When the mother of one's concubine dies, there will be beating of
   drums, but when the concubine dies, there will be no such display.
   2804. kūttiyār cettāl piṇam, avaḷ tāy cettāl maṇam.
   When a concubine dies she is a mere corpse, whereas if her mother dies,
   her remains are honoured.
   By honouring the remains of her mother it is supposed that a man
   secures greater respect from his concubine.
   2805. kūttiyār vīṭṭukku nāypōl alaikiṟāṉ.
   He frequents his concubine's house as a dog wandering about.
   2806. kūttup pārkkap pōṉa iṭattil pēy piṭittatu pōla.
   As one was seized by a demon when he went to see a comedy.
   2807. kūriya collāṉ ārilum vallaṉ.
   He whose words are keen, is of all the most powerful.
   2808. kūrukku etir utaittal cūreḻa varuttum.
   Kicking against thorns will cause pain.
   2809. kūrai ēṟik kōḻi piṭikkamāṭṭāta kurukkaḷ vāṉam kīṟi vaikuṇṭam
   kāṭṭuvārā?
   If a guru is not able to go to the house-top to catch a fowl, how can
   he rend the heavens and show vikundam to his disciple?
   2810. kūrai mēlē cōṟu pōṭṭāl āyiram kākam varum.
   If rice is thrown on the roof, a thousand crows will come.
   2811. kūrmaiyāḷaṉē nērmaiyāḷaṉ.
   The acute man is the upright man.
   2812. kūli kuṟaittāl vēlai keṭum.
   If the hire be diminished, the work will be spoiled.
   2813. kūli kuṟaittāyē kuṟai marakkāl iṭṭāyē.
   Thou hast reduced my wages, and used false measures when paying me.
   2814. kūlikkāraṉ peṇṭāṭṭi piḷḷai peṟappōkiṟāḷām kuppaiyilē āmaṇakku
   muḷaikkap pōkiṟatām.
   It is said that the wife of a labourer is about to be confined, and
   that a castor plant will spring upon the midden.
   2815. kūlikku nāṟṟu naṭa vantavaṉukku ellaikku vaḻakkō?
   Does he who came on hire to transplant grain institute a boundary suit?
   2816. kūlikkup pāvi kuṟukkē vantāṉē.
   A vicious fellow prevented the payment of my wages.
   2817. kūlikkuk kaḻu ēṟuvārkaḷā?
   Will they hire themselves to be impaled?
   2818. kūlip paṭai veṭṭumā?
   Will mere hirelings conquer?
   2819. kūḻ āṉālum kuppai āṉālum kuṭittukkoṇṭavaṉ piḻaippāṉ.
   Whether gruel or refuse, he who has drunk it will live.
   2820. kūḻukku māṅkāy tōṟkumā?
   Will an unripe mango fail before gruel?
   2821. kūḻukku māṅkāy koṇṭāṭṭam kuraṅkukkut tēṅkāy koṇṭāṭṭam.
   An unripe mango improves the gruel, the kernel of a cocoanut is a feast
   to a monkey.
   2822. kūḻukkum ācai mīcaikkum ācai .
   He wishes to drink the gruel, and he also wants a nice mustache.
   Spoken of thingsincompatible.
   2823. kūḻukkuk koṟaṭā miḷakāy.
   A chilly serves as a whip to gruel. It makes it pungent.
   2824. kūḻ eṉṟālum vāḻvukkut takkatāka kuṭikkattāṉ vēṇṭum.
   Though only gruel, it must be drunk agreeably to one's circumstances.
   2825. kūḻ eṉṟālum kuṭittavaṉ piḻaippāṉ.
   If only gruel, he who drinks it will live.
   2826. kūḻ kuṭikkilum kūṭṭu ākātu.
   Fellowship is undesirable even in drinking gruel.
   2827. kūḻ puḷittateṉṟum māṅkāy puḷittateṉṟum uṇarāmal collalāmā?
   Is it proper to say thoughtlessly that the gruel was sour, and then
   again that it was the mango that was sour?
   2828. kūṉaṉaik koṇṭu kuḻappaṭi māmi kāṇikkup piḷḷai peṟa.
   O, mother-in-law, incite a quarrel through the hunchbacked that an heir
   may be born.
   2829. kūṉaṉ kuṟai tīrntāṉ koṭiyōṉ viṉai peyarntāṉ.
   The hunchbacked is relieved, the cruel man has escaped.
   2830. kūṉi āṉālum kūṭai cumantutāṉ kūli peṟavēṇṭum.
   Although her back is crooked, she will have to carry the basket before
   she gets her hire.
   2831. kūṉi vāyāṟ keṭṭāṟpōla.
   As she (Kaikesi) was demoralized by listening to the words of Kuni.
   2832. keṭu kālattukkuk keṭṭōr puttiyaik kēṭpār.
   They will listen to the advice of the wicked when their star is
   notfavourable.
   2833. keṭu kuṭi coṟ kēḷātu.
   A decaying family will not listen to advice.
   2834. keṭukka niṉaikkil aṭukkak kēṭuṟum.
   When you mediate another's ruin, your own will soon follow.
   2835. keṭukkiṉum kalvi kēṭupaṭātu.
   Learning can suffer no damage.
   2836. keṭuppārait teyvam keṭukkum.
   The deity will destroy those that injure others.
   2837. keṭuppatum vāyāl paṭippatum vāyāl.
   It is with the mouth we injure others; it is with the mouth we read.
   2838. keṭumati kaṇṇukkut tōṉṟātu.
   One is blind to bis own imprudence.
   2839. keṭumatikkup paṭukuḻiyai veṭṭu.
   Make a pitfall for imprudence.
   2840. keṭuvāy kēṭu niṉaiyātē.
   Thou wilt be ruined, think not of destroying another.
   2841. keṭuvāṉ kēṭu niṉaippāṉ.
   He who is on the way to ruin, will mediate another's ruin.
   2842. keṭṭa kālattukku nārai keḷiṟṟai eṭuttu viḻuṅkiṉatu pōla.
   As a crane in an evil time seized and swallowed a keliru fish.
   2843. keṭṭa nāykkup paṭṭatu pirīti.
   The wretched dog feels satisfied with the beating he received.
   2844. keṭṭa ūrukku eṭṭu vārttai.
   A village doomed to ruin profits not by repeated precaution.
   2845. keṭṭa kēṭṭukku vaṭṭam kāṟpaṇamā?
   Is a premium of half a fanam demanded of one who is reduced in
   circumstances?
   2846. keṭṭa pāl nalla pāl ākumā?
   Will curdled milk become sweet again?
   2847. keṭṭatum paṭṭatum kīraikku iṟaittatum pōtum.
   I have had enough of loss, sufferings and toilin watering the vegetable
   garden.
   2848. keṭṭa kuṭikku oru tuṣṭap piḷḷai.
   A vicious child in a poor family.
   2849. keṭṭa kuṭikku oru kōṭṭai piṟantatu.
   A child is born under the star kettai in a poor family.
   2850. keṭṭa kaḻutaikkut tuṣṭaputti.
   A vicious donkey has mischievous propensities.
   2851. keṭṭavaṉ kuṭi keṭṭatu vaṭṭi naṣṭam illāmal vāṅkavē vāṅku.
   The family is ruined, do not fail to get the interest without
   reduction.
   2852. keṭṭavaṉ kuṭi keṭaṭṭum nī kuṭi miḷaku cāṟṟai.
   No matter whose family is ruined, you drink the pepper water.
   2853. keṭṭa kuṭiyē keṭum paṭṭa kālilē paṭum.
   The decaying family will be ruined. It will hit the leg which is
   already struck.
   2854. keṭṭa māṭu tēṭu muṉṉam eṭṭu māṭu tēṭalām.
   You may procure eight cows before you can recover one that has strayed.
   2855.keṭṭa mārkkattilē irukkiṟa oruvaṉ maṟṟavarkaḷaiyum atil iḻukkap
   pirayācappaṭuvāṉ.
   He who pursues a vicious course will try to lead others into the same.
   2856. keṭṭārkku uṟṟār kiḷaiyilum illai.
   The impoverished have no friends even among their own kindred.
   2857. keṭṭār vāḻntāl kiḷaikaḷaiyāyt taḷirppār vāḻntār keṭṭāl
   vaṟaiyōṭṭukkum ākār.
   When the ruined in circumstances flourish they cant out innumerable
   branches; when the prosperous are reduced to poverty they are not worth
   a potsherd.
   2858. keṭṭāṉ payal poṭṭalilē, viḻuntāṉ payal caṟukkalilē.
   The boy suffered by walking in the arid tract, he fell in the slippery
   ground.
   2859. keṭṭālum ceṭṭi ceṭṭiyē kiḻintālum paṭṭu paṭṭē.
   Though reduced in circumstances a chetty is a chetty; silk is silk
   though never so torn.
   2860. keṭṭikkāraṉ puḷuku eṭṭu nāḷukkuḷ teriyum.
   The deception of the clever will be manifest in eight days.
   2861. keṭṭikkāraṉukkup payam illai maṭṭittaṉaṉukku nayam illai .
   The clever fear nothing; the fool gains nothing.
   2862. keṭṭikkāraṉ poṭṭu eṭṭu nāḷ aḷavum.
   The reputation of the adroit lasts only eight days.
   2863. keṭṭum paṭṭaṇam cēr.
   Though you are ruined, cling to the city.
   2864. keṭṭuppōkiṟa kālam vantāl tuṣṭa putti tōṉṟātā?
   When the time of destruction comes, will not evil devices operate ?
   2865. keṭṭuppōṉa pārppāṉukkuc cettu pōkiṟa pacuvait tāṉam paṇṇiṉatu
   pōla.
   Like giving a dying cow to a poor Brahman.
   2866. keṭṭuk keṭṭuk kuṭi ākiṟatā?
   Can a family survive repeated misfortunes?
   2867. keṇṭaiyaippōṭṭu varālai iḻukkiṟatu pōla.
   Baiting with a small fish and catching a large one.
   2868. keraṭi kaṟṟavaṉ iṭaṟi viḻuntāl atuvum oru varicai eṉpāṉ.
   If the fencer fall, he will pretend he did so according to the rules of
   his art.
   2869. keliyaṉ pāṟ cōṟu kaṇṭatu pōla.
   As the greedy saw milk and rice.
   2870. kēṭatu illāṉ pāṭatu illāṉ.
   One free from loss, free from suffering.
   2871. kēṭu kālattukku ōṭu kappaṟai.
   A bad time is followed by an alms-dish.
   2872. kēṭu keṭṭa nāyē vīṭu viṭṭup pōvēṉ.
   You worthless dog quit my house.
   2873. kēṭu varum piṉṉē mati keṭṭu varum muṉṉē, āṉaivarum piṉṉē maṇi
   ōcai varum muṉṉē.
   Indigence follows indiscretion, the elephant makes its appearance
   after the sound of its bells reaches the ear.
   2874. kēṭṭatu ellām nampātē nampiṉatu ellām collātē.
   Believe not all you hear, tell not all you believe.
   2875. kēṭṭil uṟuti kūṭṭum uṭaimai.
   Fortitude under privations will tend to restore lost fortune.
   2876. kēṭpār collaik kēṭṭuk keṭātē.
   Be not deceived by hearsay reports.
   2877. kēṇmait tāṉavā vāymaik kāṉavā.
   Thou the self-existent, thou art the powerful.
   2878. kēḷum kiḷaiyum keṭṭōrkku illai.
   Friends and relations are denied to the ruined.
   2879. kēḷvic ceviyaṉ ūraik keṭuttāṉ.
   He who acted on hearsay destroyed the village.
   2880. kēḷvi uṭamai kīrttiyē kalvi.
   Instruction is wealth, and learning is fame.
   2881. kēḷvip pēccil pātitāṉ nicam.
   But half of what one hears is true.
   2882. kēḷvi muyal.
   Endeavour to obtain instruction.
   2883. kai aḻuttamāṉavaṉ karaiyēṟa māṭṭāṉ.
   The miser will not prosper.
   Literally will not "get ashore." The marriage of a girl is phrased in
   the same way.
   2884. kai illātavaṉ karaṇam pōṭalāmā, kāl illātavaṉ ōṭalāmā?
   Can one who has no hands turn a somersault, can one who has no feet run
   about?
   2885. kai uṇṭāvatu kaṟṟavarkku āmē.
   It is the learned that have hands.
   2886. kai ūṉṟik karaṇam pōṭa vēṇṭum.
   One has to fix his hands on the ground before he makes a somersault.
   2887. kai kāyttāṟ kamuku kāykkum.
   If the palm of the hand becomes callous by drawing water, the areca
   will bear.
   2888. kaikku eṭṭiṉatu vāykku eṭṭavillai.
   That which reaches the band does not always reach the mouth.
   2889. kaikkōḷaṉukkuk kāṟpuṇṇum nāykkut talaippuṇṇum pōla.
   Like a sore on the leg of a weaver, and one on the head of a dog.
   2890. kai tappik kaṇṇilē paṭṭāṟ kaiyait taṟittup pōṭuvārkaḷā?
   If the hand by accident strike the eye, will they cut it off ?
   2891. kai tappiṉāṟ karaṇam.
   If the hand missess its hold, a somersault.
   2892. kai niṟainta poṉ illā viṭṭālum kaṇ niṟainta kaṇavaṉ irukkavēṇṭum.
   Though not possessed of a handfull of gold, one should have a husband
   that fills the eye.
   2893. kai paṭṭāl kaṇṇāṭi.
   Handling makes a thing shine as glass.
   2894. kaippaḻattaik koṭuttut tuṟaṭṭip paḻattukku aṇṇātu niṟpāṉēṉ?
   Why give the fruit in your hand and stand gazing at that which can only
   be reached by a hook ?
   2895. kaipporuḷ taṉṉil meypporuḷ kalvi.
   Learning is better than riches.
   2896. kaipporuḷ illā vaḻippōkkaṉ kaḷvar muṉ paṭalām.
   The wayfaring man who has no money may encounter thieves with impunity.
   2897. kaipporuḷ aṟṟāl kaṭṭukkaḻuttiyum pārāḷ.
   If destitute of wealth, even one's own married wife will not regard
   him.
   2898. kaimpeṇṭāṭṭi peṟṟa kaḻikaṭai.
   The refuse that the widow has brought forth.
   2899. kaimpeṇcāti erumaiyil kai paḻaka vantāṉ.
   He came to the buffalo of the widow to learn to milk.
   2900. kaiyāṟ kiḷḷi eṟiyum vēlaikkuk kaṉatta kōṭāli vēṇṭumō ?
   Is a heavy axe required for a work that may be easily effected by the
   hand ?
   2901. kaiyāṟ kiḻikkum paṉaṅkiḻaṅkiṟku āppum vallīṭṭukkuṟṟiyum ēṉ?
   Why a wedge and a mallet to split the edible root of the palmyra?
   2902. kaiyilum illai ceṭṭiyār paiyilum illai kācu.
   There is no money either in the hands or purse of the chetty.
   2903. kaiyilum maṭiyilum illātavaṉaik kaḷvaṉ eṉṉa ceyyalām ?
   What harm can a thief do to him who has nothing in hand or in his belt?
   2904. kaiyilē mañcaḷ āṉāl kāriyam mañcūrtāṉ.
   If the hands are dipped in turmeric water, the undertaking will prove
   successful.
   2905. kaiyil irukka neyyilē kaiyiṭuvāṉēṉ?
   When it (the stolen thing) is in the hand, why put the hand in (hot)
   ghee?
   2906. kaiyil illātavaṉ kaḷḷaṉ.
   He who has nothing in hand is a thief.
   2907. kaiyil ariciyum kamaṇṭalattil taṇṇīrum.
   Rice in the hand and water in the pot.
   2908. kaiyil eṭukkumuṉṉam kōḻi mōcameṉṟu aṟiyātu.
   The fowl is not aware of its danger before it is caught.
   2909. kaiyiṟ puṇṇukkuk kaṇṇāṭi vēṇṭumā?
   Is a mirror required for a sore in the hand ?
   2910. kaiyiṟ paṟavaiyai viṭṭuk kāṭṭup paṟavaikkuk kaṇṇi vaikkalāmā?
   Why let a bird in the hand go and snare one in the jungle?
   2911. kaiyiṟ piḷḷaiyōṭu kaṭalil viḻuntēṉ.
   I have fallen into the sea with the child in my arms.
   2912. kaiyiṟ kuṭaiyum kāliṟ cōṭum vēṇṭum.
   One must have an umbrella in the hand, and shoes on the feet.
   2913. kaiyiṟ kiṭaitta amutaik kamaril ūṟṟalāmā?
   May one pour into the crackedground the nectar he has in his band?
   2914. kaiyiṟ kācu vāyil tōcai āmā ?
   Will the money in the hand become a cake in the mouth?
   2915. kaiyum kaṇakkum cari.
   The money in hand is just sufficient for current expenses.
   2916. kaiyaip pār mukattaip pār eṉṟu iruntāl kāriyam ākumā?
   If you say look at the hands and look at the face, will the work be
   accomplished?
   2917. kaiviṉai karavēl.
   Neglect not a work in which you are skilful.
   2918. kokkarippārkkuc cuvarkkamō neruppiṟ kutippārkkuc cuvarkkamō?
   Whichattains swerga the mere boaster, or the self-immolated ?
   2919.kokku iḷaṅkuñcum kōṇāta teṅkum kaṇṭatu illai.
   No one has seen a young crane, nor a straight cocoanut tree.
   2920. kokkukku uṇṭā vīracaivam ?
   Does the stork observe the rules of Linga-worship?
   The strict Saivite is a rigid vegetarian.
   2921. kokkuk kūṭṭattil rājāḷi viḻuntāṟpōla.
   As if a falcon fell among herons.
   2922. kokkut tiṉṉap peruccāḷi pāyntāṟpōl
   As if a bandycoote rushed on to prey on a stork.
   2923. kokkukkut teriyumā kōḻikkuñcaik koṇṭupōka?
   Does the crane know how to carry away a chicken ?
   2924. kokkeṉṟu niṉaittāyō koṅkaṇā?
   O devotee, did you mistake me for a stork?
   2925. koṅkilē kuṟuṇi viṟkiṟatu, iṅku eṉṉattiṟku.
   Why remain here when grain sells cheap in the Kongu country.
   2926. kocukiṉ mutukilē piḷavai vantatupōla.
   As a carbuncle appeared on the back of a mosquito.
   2927. kocukilē kuṟuṇi pāl kaṟakkalāmā?
   Can you draw from a mosquito a kuruni of milk?
   2928. kocukilē piḷavai atilē nīraḻivu, aṟukkiṟatu eṅkē aṭṭai viṭukiṟatu
   eṅkē ?
   A mosquito suffering from a carbuncle, has also diabetes : where shall
   we put in thelancet, and how apply leeches?
   2929. kocukē kocukē talai muḻuku nāṉ māṭṭēṉ caṉikkiḻamai.
   O mosquito, mosquito, bathe your head; I will not, it is Saturday.
   2930. kocukaip poruṭṭāy eṇṇik karuṭaṉ etirttāṟpōla,
   As if a hawk assailed a mosquito imagining it to be a rival.
   2931. kocukai vaṭikaṭṭi oṭṭakattai viḻuṅkukiṟatā?
   What! do you strain out a gnat and swallow a camel?
   2932. kocukai vaṭippār, acukaippaṭuvār.
   Those who strain out gnats are naturally suspected.
   2933. koccikkup pōṉavaṉ ceytiyaip pār, taṉ kuruvai viṟṟavaṉ ceytiyaip
   pār.
   See the result of his having gone to Cochin, and of one who betrayed
   his Guru.
   2934. koñcattil irukkiṟatā kuraṅku miḷaku nīr kuṭikkiṟatu ?
   What, is it a small thing for a monkey to drink pepper water?
   2935. koñcattil uṇmai illātavaṉ kōṭiyilum irukkamāṭṭāṉ.
   Not one even of ten millions is unfaithful in a little thing.
   2936. koṭikaḷ arukāṉa marattilē paṭarum.
   Creepers spread over the trees that grow near them.
   2937. koṭikkuk kāy kaṉattirukkumā?
   Is its fruit burdensome to the creeper?
   2938. koṭi cuṟṟip peṇ piṟantāl kōttirattiṟku ākātu.
   It is an evil omen to a tribe for a girl to be born with her navel
   string round the body.
   2939. koṭukkiṟāṉ paḻaṉiyāṇṭi, tiṉkiṟāṉ cuppaṉāṇṭi.
   Palaniandi gives and Subbanandi eats.
   2940. koṭukka māṭṭātavaṉ kūttaip paḻittāṉ.
   He who was not disposed to contribute to the drama spoke
   disparaginglyof it.
   2941. koṭukkiṟataiyum koṭuttuk kuṣṭarōki kālil viḻuvāṉēṉ?
   Whilst bestowing gifts why fall prostrate at the feet of a leper?
   2942. koṭukkāta iṭaiyaṉ ciṉaiyāṭṭaik kāṭṭiṉatupōla.
   As a niggardly shepherd pointed to a sheep that was with young.
   2943. koṭuṅkōl maṉṉaṉ āḷum nāṭṭiṟ kaṭumpuli vāḻum kāṭu naṉṟu.
   A jungle inhabited by fierce tigers is better than a country ruled by a
   cruel tyrant.
   2944. koṭuṅkōl aracaṉ kīḻ kuṭiyirukkal ākātu.
   It is not good to live under a tyrant king.
   2945. koṭuttataik kēṭṭāl aṭuttu varum pakai.
   If that which has been given be demanded hatred ensues.
   2946. koṭuttavaṉaip pukaḻvār koṭātavaṉai ikaḻvār.
   They praise the liberal, but reproach the niggard.
   2947. koṭuttavaṉ appaṉ koṭātavaṉ cappaṉ.
   The liberal are fathers, niggards are useless.
   2948. koṭuttataik koṭukkum kuṟaḷip picācu.
   The dwarf demon returns only that which had been given to it.
   Jugglery is generally attributed by the common people to the power of a
   dwarf demon which, retaining the materials entrusted to it, gives them
   one by one to the juggler as he may want them.
   2949. koṭuttavarukku ellām uṇṭu koṭātavarukku oṉṟum illai.
   The liberal have all things, the niggardly nothing.
   2950. koṭuttu uṟavukoḷ, kōḷaṉ eṉṟu irēl.
   Be liberal and friendly, avoid being called a talebearer.
   2951. koṭuppārait taṭukkātē.
   Do not check the liberal.
   2952. koṭumai aṟṟavaṉ kaṭumai aṟṟavaṉ.
   The kind-hearted is yielding.
   2953. koṭum pāvi āṉālum koṇṭa māmiyār vēṇṭum.
   However cruel a mother-in-law may be, she is nevertheless desirable.
   2954. koṭṭikkiḻaṅku veṭṭukiṟavaḷukkuk kōyilil vantu āṭat teriyumā?
   Can the woman who digs up roots dance before a temple idol?
   2955. koṭṭik koṭṭi aḷantālum kuṟuṇi patakku ākātu.
   Though measured again and again, a kuruni will not become a pathakku.
   2956. koṭṭiṉāl tēḷ koṭṭā viṭṭāṟ piḷḷaippūcciyā?
   If it stings it is scorpion, if it does not sting is it only a gryllus
   ?
   2957. koṇṭavaṉ cīṟiṉāl kaṇṭavaṉukku ellām iḷakkāram.
   If despised by her husband, all will slight her.
   2958. koṇṭavaṉuṭaiya palattaik kaṇṭāl kuppaimēṭu ēṟic caṇṭai ceyvāḷ.
   If she finds out the strength of her husband, she will get on the
   rubbish heap and
   fight.
   2959. koṇṭār muṉiyiṟ kaṇṭār muṉivar.
   If husbands treat their wives angrily, others will do so too.
   2960. koṇṭu kulam pēcukiṟatā?
   Do you speak lightly of a family into which you have chosen to marry?
   2961. koṇṭaikkup pū cūṭic caṇṭaikku niṟkiṟatu.
   To stand up to quarrel with a chaplet of flowers on the tresses.
   2962. koṇṭaikkup pū cūṭukiṟatā tāṭikkup pū cūṭukiṟatā?
   Are flowers for the tresses, or for the beard ?
   2963. koṇṭōr ellām peṇṭīr alla.
   All that are betrothed are not real wives.
   2964. koycakattil koḷḷi vaittukkoṇṭatu pōla.
   Like keeping a firebrand in the border of her own cloth.
   2965. kollaṉ teruvil ūci vilaipōmā?
   Can needles be sold in a street of smiths ?
   2966. kollaṉ eḷimai kaṇṭu kuraṅku kālukkup pūṇ kaṭṭac coṉṉatām.
   It is said that a monkey seeing the weakness of a blacksmith urged him
   to adorn his
   legs with rings.
   2967. kollaṉ piṇam viṟaittāṟpōla.
   As the smith's corpse became stiff.
   2968. kollukiṟatum cōṟu piḻaippikkiṟatum cōṟu.
   Rice kills and it makes alive.
   2969.kollaik kāṭṭu nari pallaik kāṭṭiṉatu pōla.
   Like a wild jackal showing his teeth.
   2970. kollaik kāṭṭil nariyaik kuṭivaittukkoṇṭatu pōl.
   Like encouraging jackals in a field.
   2971. kollaikkup palli kuṭikkuc cakuṉi.
   He is a palli plant,-Bachnera Asiatica-to a garden, and a Saguni to a
   family.
   Both are injurious.
   2972. kollaiyil kuṟṟiyai aṭainta pullu uḻavar uḻupaṭaikkuk keṭumō ?
   Will the ploughshare destroy the grass at the foot of scarecrows in the
   field?
   2973. kollai pāḻāṉālum kuruvikku irai pañcamā?
   Are small birds famished because the fields lie waste?
   2974. koḻukkaṭṭaikkut talaiyum illai kuṭiyaṉukku muṟaiyum illai .
   The steamed cake has no head, nor has a drunkard sense to regard the
   rules of
   relationship.
   2975. koḻukkaṭṭaikkut talaiyum illaik kālum illai, kuṟaḷarukku neṟiyum
   illai muṟaiyum illai.
   The kolukkattai has neither head nor foot, foresters are neither
   virtuous nor mannerly.
   2976. koḻuttavaṉ kaikku iḷaittavaṉ turumpu.
   He who is thin is a mere straw to him who is fat.
   2977. koḷ eṉṟāl vāyait tiṟakkiṟatu, kaṭivāḷam eṉṟāl vāyai mūṭukiṟatā ?
   What! opening the mouth when one says gram, and covering it when one
   says bridle ?
   2978. koḷvārum illaik koṭuppārum illai.
   There are neither buyers nor sellers.
   2979. koḷḷi koṇṭu talai coṟikiṟatā ?
   Do you scratch your head with a firebrand ?
   2980. koḷḷikku etir pōṉālum, veḷḷikku etir pōkal ākātu.
   Though you may encounter a firebrand, you must not appear before the
   planet Venus.
   2981. koḷḷik kaṭṭaiyāl cuṭṭāl koppaḷikkumeṉṟu vāḻaippaḻam koṇṭu
   vaṭuvaṭuvāyc cuṭukiṟāy.
   Because burning with a firebrand will produce blisters, you are
   branding me with a
   plantain fruit.
   2982.koḷḷum varaiyil koṇṭāṭṭam koṇṭa piṟaku tiṇṭāṭṭam.
   Great pleasure till attained, great misery afterwards.
   2983. koḷḷaikkup pōṉālum kūṭṭu ākātu.
   Even when going to plunder association is bad.
   2984. koḷḷaikkum ūḻikkum tappu.
   Escape from plunder and pestilence.
   2985. koṟṟavaṉ taṉṉilum kaṟṟavaṉ mikkōṉ.
   The learned are more than kings.
   2986. koṉṟāṟ pāvam tiṉṟāl tīrum.
   The sin arising from killing is expiated by eating the flesh so killed.
   2987. kōṭālikkāmpu kulattukku īṉam.
   The handle of the axe is the enemy of its kind.
   2988. kōṭi cīmāṉum kōvaṇa āṇṭiyum cariyā?
   Are the wealthy and mendicants on a par?
   2989. kōṭi cīmāṉ tuṇiyavēṇṭum, allatu kōvaṇa āṇṭi tuṇiyavēṇṭum.
   An attempt is to be made either by the wealthy, or by a beggar that has
   only a span-long cloth.
   2990. kōṭi taṉam iruntālum kuṇam illā maṅkaiyai maṇam muṭikkal ākātu.
   It is not good to marry a girl, no matter how great her wealth, if her
   natural temper is exceptionable.
   2991. kōṭīcuvaraṉ ākavēṇṭumō, allatu lakṣātipati ākavēṇṭumō ?
   Which is to be preferred as a possession, ten millions, or a hundred
   thousand?
   2992. kōṭai iṭi iṭittāṟpōla.
   As it thundered in summer.
   2993. kōṭ colpavaṉaik koṭum tēḷ eṉa niṉai.
   Treat him who carries tales, as a scorpion.
   2994. kōṭ collum vāy kāṟṟuṭaṉ neruppu.
   The mouth of the slanderer is as fire exposed to the wind.
   2995. kōṭṭāṉai maṭiyiṟ kaṭṭikkoṇṭatu pōla.
   Like concealing an ominous owl in the lap.
   2996. kōṭṭuc campā ākkivaittāl pōṭṭuc cāppiṭa varuvārkaḷ.
   If samba rice is boiled, they will come and eat.
   2997. kōṭṭaiyil peṇ piṟantālum pōṭṭa eḻuttup pōkumā?
   Will destiny be averted because the female was born in a fort ?
   2998. kōṭṭaikkuḷḷē kuttum veṭṭumā?
   Can a great battle be fought in a fort ?
   2999. kōṇak kompu ēṟi eṉṉa kutirai ēṟi eṉṉa vīṇarkkum kīrttikkum veku
   tūram.
   Whether they mount a palanquin or a horse, the distance between the
   vain and reputation is very great.
   3000. kōṇi koṇṭatu erutu cumantatu.
   That which the sack contained the buffalo carried.
     __________________________________________________________________

   This webpage was last revised on 16 September 2021.
   Feel free to send the corrections by email to the webmaster
   (pmadurai@gmail.com).

References

   1. http://www.projectmadurai.org/
