                                 [pmdr0.gif]
                     ___________________________________

                                nālaṭiyār
                          āṅkila moḻipeyarppu
                            pōp maṟṟum ellis

                  Naladiyar verses with English Translation
                       by Rev. G.U.Pope and F.W. Ellis
                           In unicode/utf-8 format
                     ___________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   Acknowledgements:
       Our Sincere thanks go to Archives.org for providing a scanned PDF
       copy of this work
       The e-text has been generated using Google OCR and subsequently
       edited by K.Kalyanasundaram.
       We thank Mrs. Priya Kulandaivelu for her help in proof-reading the
       etext file.
       Preparation of HTML and PDF versions: Dr. K. Kalyanasundaram,
       Lausanne, Switzerland.
       © Project Madurai, 1998-2020.
       Project Madurai is an open, voluntary, worldwide initiative devoted
       to preparation
       of electronic texts of tamil literary works and to distribute them
       free on the Internet.
       Details of Project Madurai are available at the website
       [1]https://www.projectmadurai.org/
       You are welcome to freely distribute this file, provided this
       header page is kept intact.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                nālaṭiyār
              āṅkila moḻipeyarppu - pōp maṟṟum ellis
                  Naladiyar verses with English Translation
                       by Rev. G.U.Pope and F.W. Ellis
                        ____________________________

   Source:
       Naladiyar
       with Translations in English by
       Rev. Dr. G.U. Pope and Mr. F.W. Ellis
       Forward by Dr. M. Varadarajanar
       The South Indai Saiva Siddhantha Works Publishing Society
       Tinnevelly, Madras- 1
       © 1963 (first edition March 1958)
       Publication No: 927
       Appar Achakam, Madras-1.
       --------------
       CONTENTS

   Forward
       Introduction
       Index to Chapters
       Text and Translation
       F.W. Ellis' Translation of some Quatrains
       Index to Quatrains
       Glossary Photo Rev. Dr. G. U. Pope

   --------
   FOREWORD
   Of the great ancient works of Tamilnad known for their moral profundity
   and weighty comments on life and thought, Tirukkural and Naladiyar
   stand foremost. The proverbial saying "nālumiraṇṭumcollukkuuṟuti ''
   (the couplets of Tirukkural and the quatrains of Naladiyar are the best
   of ethical sayings) glorifies their value in a single sentence. Great
   ethical and philosophical utterances have been rendered in poetic form
   in Naladiyar. The poetic value of the stanzas cannot be underestimated
   although it is true that their moral value pre-eminently appeals to the
   readers. W. H. Hudson observes: “there is no reason why poetry should
   not be the outcome of philosophy and the vehicle of philosophic truth
   without sacrificing anything of its essential poetic qualities and
   graces.” Naladiyar belongs to that category of poetry which celebrates
   philosophic truth without sacrificing itsessential poetic charm. The
   writers of these stanzas were poets who also wished to be great
   teachers and moralists.
   The authorship of this work is ascribed to a group of Jain ascetics who
   lived in the third or fourth century A.D. Its compilation has a tale to
   tell. In a critical situation of famine in the Pandiya Country, a group
   of eight thousand Jain ascetics left their place each leaving a stanza
   behind him. Of them four hundred are said to have been selected and
   compiled. The stanzas themselves testify to the fact that this is not
   the work of a single author, but of many belonging to the same school
   and age. That is why we find repetition of ideas as in stanzas 207 and
   210 and similarity of expression as in stanzas 230 and 238. That this
   work is later than Tirukkural is evident from the classification and
   arrangement of chapters on the model of the latter, the whole work
   consisting of three parts and each chapter containing ten stanzas. But
   this classification is not so apt and so complete as in Tirukkural, as
   may be seen from the loose connection of the following stanzas to the
   chapters in which they are placed :-

       Stanza No.         Chapter No.
       33, 34, 35, 39, 40 4
       58                 6
       78 to 80           8
       102                11
       111 to 120         12
       124 to 126, 128    13
       181 to 183         19

   The words and ideas expressed in stanza No.305 are not different from
   those of the Tirukkural couplets Nos. 1061 and 1069.
   This is a Jain work laying great stress on renunciation. The ascetic
   note is struck in almost all the chapters except those on High birth
   (15), The Support of kindred (21), Scrutiny in forming friendships
   (22), Bearing and forbearing in friendship (23), Unreal friend ship
   (24) and Chaste matronhood (247). Yet, like Tirukkural, it appeals to
   the learned of all religions and sects by virtue of the eternal truths
   it explains and the moral philosophy it expounds. There is also a
   special effectiveness in elucidating certain ideas in four lines with
   appropriate emotional fervour as in stanzas 36, 40 and 83, which is not
   so easily possible in the couplets of Tirukkural.
   The whole struggle of the human race from barbarism to civilisation is
   one continuous effort to maintain and extend its moral dignity. The
   learned among the ancient Tamils had perceived this clearly and laid
   due emphasis in their teachings on the moral and ethical aspects of
   human life. The Tamils are fortunate enough in having preserved these
   noble teachings in their ancient language and, as Dr. G. U. Pope has
   remarked, “Tirukkural and Naladiyar throw a flood of light upon the
   whole ethical and social philosophy of the Tamil people.” Dr. Pope's
   characteristic enthusiasm, sincerity and passionate search for truth
   enabled him to realise the value of these works and introduce them to
   the Westerners through his translations. He carried out his project
   very successfully. The grammatical notes, the metrical introduction and
   the lexicon and concordance appended to his translation are scholarly
   and instructive. His translation has an inspiring quality and is
   nowhere a travesty of the original. We are greatly indebted to him for
   his valuable services to the advancement of Tamil language and
   literature.
   The South India Saiva Siddhanta Works Publishing Society deserves our
   congratulations and thanks for having published this useful translation
   of Naladiyarby a renowned scholar and ardent lover of Tamil. F. W.
   Ellis' translation of some of the stanzas given at the end of the book
   adds to the value of this publication.
   Madras-30, 17-2-1958. M. Varadarajan
   ----------
   INTRODUCTION
   THIS edition of a popular Tamil Classic was undertaken mainly with the
   view of assisting Europeans to acquire some acquaintance with classical
   Tamil. It is intended to be taken up after the study of the Second
   Catechism of Tamil Grammar; and is a companion volume to the Kurral:
   these two great works serving as mutual commentaries, and together
   throwing a flood of light upon the whole ethical and social philosophy
   of the Tamil people.
   I am not without a hope and belief that such editions of their great
   classics may find favour with some at least of the great multitude of
   young Tamil men who pursue with enthusiasm and fair success their
   English studies, but are, I apprehend, in some danger, alas ! of
   neglecting their own wonderful language.
   To avoid repetition, the student is referred to the introduction to the
   Kurral for information on many matters connected with Tamil, and
   important to those who would thoroughly master the Naladi.
   This work is recommended to the student of Tamil for several weighty
   reasons.
   These are not so much the originality of its teaching, as the peculiar
   terseness and vigour of its style ; and the fidelity with which it
   reflects the thoughts and ideas of the great mass of the Tamil people,
   and indeed of the yeomanry of India ; for, though composed most
   probably by Jains, it contains scarcely any traces of their peculiar
   tenets. For these the student must read the Jivaga Chintamani, and this
   is no easytask, though made easier by the publication of an admirable
   edition of it by Mr. Ve. Caminathaiyar.
   The Naladi-nannurru, or ‘Four Hundred Quatrains,' is often called the
   Vellalar-Vetham, the ‘Bible of the Cultivators of the soil.'
   Not only is it one of the text-books prescribed for the Oriental Honour
   School of this University, but it is moreover a chief subject of
   examination in the Madras University; and is taught, in some shape, in
   every vernacular school in the Tamil country.
   I have therefore in my official capacity prepared under some
   disadvantages, this edition, in the hope of bringing at least a few
   European minds into closer contact with those of our Tamil
   fellow-subjects; and of inducing young Tamil students to bring the
   freer and more invigorating, though more laborious methods of European
   study to bear upon their own great classics.
   A recent Tamil editor of the Naladi begins his preface with these
   words, "The Naladiyar is one of the moral text-books emanating from the
   (Madura) Academy, (caṅkam) and, therefore, came into existence 4000
   years ago!'
   He also gives, with slight variations, the current tradition regarding
   the 400 quatrains. It is briefly this : ‘Once on a time, 8000 Jain
   ascetics, driven by famine, came to a Pandiyan king and were supported
   by him. When the famine was over they prepared to return to their own
   country, though the king wished to retain the learned strangers who
   added lustre to his court. At last the poets were driven to depart
   secretly by night. In the morning it was found that each bard had left
   on his seat a quatrain. These were examined and found to differ widely
   from one another. The king then ordered them all to be thrown into the
   river Vaigai, when it was found that the palm-leaf scrolls containing
   these 400 quatrains ascended the river against the current, and came to
   the bank. To these the king gave the name of Naladiyar (the
   quatrainists).' Some other verses reached the banks at various spots,
   and are found in two collections, called 'Old sayings' (paḻamoḻi) and
   ‘The Essence of the way of virtue' (aṟaneṟiccāram). These atter works
   have never obtained the popularity enjoyed by the Naladiyar; and I
   should regard them as mainly imitations due to a later period, though
   some of the verses are certainly more or less ancient.
   These traditions point to a collection of popular verses made after the
   impalement of the Samanar (or Amanar - Jains, lit, 'naked ones'),
   perhaps in the time of Sundara Pandiyan (or Kun-Pandiyan), who probably
   lived in the twelfth centuryA.D.
   These verses, mainly but not, I think, exclusively of Jain origin, were
   doubtless expurgated by the Caivas, under whose chief guardianship
   Tamil literature has since remained.
   They were re-edited, interpreted, arranged, and forced into a kind of
   parallelism to the Kurral by Pathumanar (‘a lotus'), of whom nothing is
   really known. I have printed an elegant invocation ascribed to him. No
   other editor has done much for the quatrains.
   The fact that to them exclusively the title of Naladi (or quatrain) was
   given seems to render it probable that they constitute some of the
   earliest specimens of this elegant metre, the Alcaic of Tamil.
   As might be expected from their history, no consistent and developed
   system of philosophy, religion, or morals can be deduced from them; and
   it may be said with truth that these utterances have too little
   sequence and connexion to admit of any scientific criticism. Yet it is
   a kind of merit to put a happy point upon it commonplace; and these
   epigrams, drawn sometimes from Sanskrit sources and oftener forming the
   ground of ornate Sanskrit verses, written in imitation or rivalry, have
   become household words through all South India.
   I am unwilling to enter here on any discussion of the date of this and
   other Tamil classics, since there are scarcely any ascertained facts or
   ancient inscriptions from which to reason. The discussion of these
   matters requires aptitude, leisure, and opportunity for archaeological
   research (and these I do not possess), in addition to a critical
   acquaintance with Tamil literature. The want of this last essential has
   rendered many otherwise profound researches almost valueless. A very
   careful consideration of many masterpieces of Tamil literature leads me
   to think that between A. D. 800 and 1200 the greatest of these works
   were composed. Internal evidence, as far as I see, is all we have to
   rely on.
   Hiouen-Thsang, the Buddhist pilgrim who visited the continent of India
   in 640 A. D., says that in Malakuta the people were not much addicted
   to the cultivation of literature, and only valued the pursuit of
   wealth; and mentions Jains as the most prominent sect. Now, this
   Malukuta, must be Malakotta, Malainadu, Malaya, Malayalam, and seems to
   have included the whole Southern part of the Madras Presidency
   (Hultzsch, South-Indian Inscriptions, vol, ii part i, p. 2 note) : the
   Pandya and Cera Kingdoms.
   The Jains were great students and copyists of books (Burnell, S. I.
   Palaeography, p. 88). We may feel quite sure that the seventh century
   A. D., at the latest, saw the beginning of Tamil literature under Jain
   auspices. Perhaps the Jains fostered the vernaculars partly out of
   opposition to the Brahmans. Reformers and missionaries, who generally
   address themselves to the intelligent middle classes, have often been
   the most assiduous students and promoters of the vulgar tongues.
   Quatrain 243 of the Naladishows the feeling of hostility that existed
   between North and South : between Hindus and Jains. The great antiquity
   of Tamil, which is the one worthy rival of Sanskrit, is abundantly
   plain.
   The ancient grammatical works existing in Tamil, and its wonderful
   metrical system, prove its assiduous cultivation for long ages. An
   elaborate, scientific series of metres, such as Tamil glories in,
   adapted to every style and theme of composition, is the growth of
   centuries. Classical Tamil bears every mark of slow and natural
   evolution; but the subject is complicated by the number of works in
   circulation falsely attributed to old writers. The many really
   ridiculous forgeries of this kind bring discredit on all Tamil
   literature. Tamil scholars should banish, among other things, such
   spurious works as many of those attributed to Agastya, Avvai,
   Pattanattu-pillai, and others.
   There is no mention of God in the Naladi (save in the quite modern
   invocation) and no trace of religion. In this respect the quatrains
   differ from the Kurral. There are indeed a few poetical references to
   certain deities, and allusions to popular beliefs and rites, but the
   bards evidently were not orthodox Hindus.
   The misery of embodiment (piṟavi) in successive and infinitely varied
   forms, and the bliss of release (mutti) from all of these, are often
   expressed and illustrated with every kind of figure. It is assumed that
   always, to all, conscious existence on earth, as well as in any heavens
   or hells, is an absolute evil. Here, of course, we find ourselves in
   antagonism.
   Yet pervading these verses there seems to me to be a strong sense of
   moral obligation, an earnest aspiration after righteousness, a fervent
   and unselfish charity, and generally a loftiness of aim that are very
   impressive. I have felt sometimes as if there must be a blessing in
   store for a people that delight so utterly in compositions thus
   remarkably expressive of a hunger and thirst after righteousness. They
   are the foremost among the peoples of India, and the Kurral and Naladi
   have helped to make them so.
   It is in vain to discuss elaborately the origin and possible sources of
   the work. The majority of the verses were almost certainly sung by Jain
   ascetics, yet there are a few that seem to be from the Maha bharata,
   and undoubtedly many of the quartrains are fragments of the old ethical
   teaching which goes under the name of Niti-Castra. The history of south
   India permits us to expect to trace not only Buddhist, or Jain, but
   also Greek, Chiristian, and even Muhammadan influences in the early
   Tamil classics, as much almost as those inspired by Sanskrit writings.
   When we examine each quatrain as an artistic whole kind of cameo--we
   find that there are several distinct and clearly marked types. Some of
   these may be conveniently arranged in classes.
   1. There are the simply didactic.
   Here the student must first master the third and fourth lines, in which
   is enunciated the truth, precept, or principle, of which the former
   part of the quatrain gives the proof or illustration. This is a
   prevailing type also in the Kurral. A Venba verse, like a sonnet,
   should have a very effective and striking finish.
   This is seen in the first quatrain, where the aphorism is, 'worldly
   prosperity is a thing of no account’.
   This axiom is illustrated by a matter of daily experience. The
   connective is eṉiṉ = 'if this is an undeniable fact, then.......,'
   Compare also 293.
   2. One class of the didactic quatrain depends for its effectiveness
   chiefly on some apt and ingenious simile, illustration, or analogy. To
   us some of these seem forced and fanciful conceits, but we really are
   not always in a position to judge or rightly estimate them.
   In 290 the aptness of the figure, the beauty of the expression, the
   wonderful terseness of the conclusion, together with the perfection of
   the form and rhythm, leave nothing to be desired.
   3. In some of these the simile is simply thrown in, while the most
   prominent thing is the clear enunciation of a truth. Here the whole
   runs on like rhetorical prose. Examples of this are 8, 49, 87.
   4. Some are cumulative, with or without a climax.
   Thus in 65 we find three statements, with a thread of connexion : 'It
   is the difficulty of the achievement that makes it meritorious.' In 80
   we have three precepts. In 100 there is a climax. See 4, 55, 88.
   5. Others are enumerative, where the various parts and accessories of
   some idea are summed up. See 74, 81, 83, 34, 119.
   6. A few are antithetic, suggesting a contrast with or without a
   simile; as, 48, 51, 52, 89.
   7. A very few contain puns. So 39, 56.
   If I am not deceived there is in many of these verses something far
   beyond mere technical skill. At times by a few happy touches an idea is
   expressed in such apt language, and illuminated by such a picturesque
   use and adaptation of familiar words, each chosen with truest and most
   accurate discrimination, that the quatrain becomes a group of life-like
   pictures, on which the mind is fain to linger long, and to which it
   recurs often. In this matchless verse (135) —
   kalvi karaiyila kaṟpavar nāḷ cila
       mella niṉaikkiṟ piṇipala — teḷḷitiṉ
       ārāyn tamaivuṭaiya kaṟpavē nīroḻiyap
       pāluṇ kurukiṟ ṟerintu. -

   not a syllable could be spared; while almost every word is common and
   easy, yet is the very fittest and is used in its exact meaning. It is
   somewhat archaic ;— has a fascinating air of mystery;—pleasantly
   exercises and amply rewards the student's ingenuity ;— seems dark at
   first, but once lit up, sparkles for ever.
   Thus karai = shore suggests a metaphor: 'learning is the
   shoreless—infinite—ocean.'
   Then comes the simple antithesis, ‘the learners days are few’. In Tamil
   the use of the same root twice (in kalvi and kaṟpavar) and again in the
   third line (kaṟpavē) imparts an added charm.
   Into these perfectly (to Tamil ears) harmonious lines is compressed a
   whole chapter:
   ‘The subjects of study (kalvi with a plural verb) are infinitely
   numerous ; but the learners' days are few : and if it be calmly thought
   out, men are liable to many diseases. [piṇi = natural infirmities or
   “bonds," that enfeeble and restrict.] Youthful enthusiasm may lead men
   to anticipate great and varied triumphs ; calm reflection teaches them
   their natural weakness. So, men. should learn with discrimination
   (teḷḷitu), examining closely (ārāy) things befitting (amai, “suit,
   satisfy, gladden') them, with intelligence (terintu) like that of the
   bird (the semi-divine Hansa), that drinks only the milk and leaves the
   water, when these mingled are presented to it. Of course this last is
   received as a fact!
   I have gratefully to acknowledge the liberal assistance of the
   Secretary of State for India in Council as formerly in the case of the
   Kurral. The Delegates of the Clarendon Press procured type especially
   for the book, and made the arrangements by which this Tamil classic is
   issued with a typograpical accuracy hardly ever attained in a similar
   work. To them my most grateful thanks are due.
   His Highness the Maharaja of Travancore has also subscribed liberally
   to the work.
   To the skill, patience, and unwearied zeal of Mr. Pembrey, Oriental
   reader at the Clarendon Press, it is mainly due that no table of errata
   is needed to a work so complicated and difficult.
   It will be seen that the editor and translator has sought carefully and
   patiently to interpret his authors, and has avoided all controversy.
   His aim in this work has been simply to introduce Tamil thoughts to
   English students. We need to understand one another and love one
   another, if we are to be of any mutual benefit. He who knows and loves
   'sweet' Tamil may come to know and love those to whom it is so dear,
   and thus to be known and loved by them.
   Indian Institute, Oxford,
   February, 1893. G. U. Pope.
   -------------
                        ____________________________

   uḷḷuṟai - INDEX
   atikāram
   kaṭavuḷ vāḻttu : Invocation
   pakuti 1 - Part I aṟattuppāl - On Virtue
   1. celvanilaiyāmai : The Instability of Prosperity
       2. iḷamai nilaiyāmai : Youth Abides Not
       3. yākkai nilaiyāmai : The Bodily Frame Endures Not
       4. aṟaṉ valiyuṟuttal : The Might of Virtue
       5. tūytaṉmai : Impurity
       6. tuṟavu : Renunciation
       7. ciṉamiṉmai : The Absence of Anger : Meekness
       8. poṟaiyuṭaimai : Patience
       9. piṟar maṉai nayavāmai : The Not Desiring Other Men's Wives
       10. īkai : Liberality
       11. paḻaviṉai : Old Deeds
       12. meymmai : Truth : Reality
       13. tīviṉaiyaccam : Dread of Evil Deeds

   pakuti 2 - Part II poruṭpāl - On Wealth
   14. kalvi : Learning
       15. kuṭippiṟappu : High birth
       16. mēṉmakkaḷ : Great Men
       17. periyāraip piḻaiyāmai : Avoidance of Offence to the Great
       18. nalliṉañcērtal : Association with the Good
       19. perumai : (Moral) Greatness
       20. tāḷāṇmai : Preserving Energy
       21. cuṟṟan taḻāl : The Support of Kindred
       22. naṭpārāytal : Scrutiny in Forming Friendship
       23. naṭpiṟ piḻai poṟuttal : Bearing and Forbearing in Friendship
       24. kūṭā naṭpu : Unreal Friendship
       25. aṟivuṭaimai : The Possession of Practical Wisdom
       26. aṟiviṉmai : The Lack of Practical Wisdom
       27. naṉṟiyil celvam : Wealth that profits not
       28. īyāmai : Absence of Charity; or, the Miser
       29. iṉmai : Poverty
       30. māṉam : Honour (Self respect)
       31. iravaccam : The Dread of Mendicancy
       32. avaiyaṟital The Knowledge of the Assembly
       33. pullaṟivāṇmai : Insufficient Knowledge
       34. pētaimai : Utter Folly
       35. kīḻmai : Lowness
       36. kayamai : Baseness
       37. paṉṉeṟi : Miscellaneous Topics
       38. potumakaḷir : Wantons
       39. kaṟpuṭai makaḷir : Chaste Matronhood

   pakuti 3 - Part III kāmattuppāl - On Love (or Pleasure)
   40. kāmanutaliyal : The Characteristics of Love

   F. W. Ellis' Translation of Some Quatrains
   pāṭṭu mutaṟkuṟippu akaravaricai
   Glossary
   -------------

      nālaṭiyār - āṅkila moḻipeyarppu - pōp maṟṟum ellis
         NALADIYAR --English Translation by Rev. Pope and Mr. Ellis

   kaṭavuḷ vāḻttu
   (nēricai veṇpā)
   vāṉoṭu villiṉ varavaṟiyā vāymaiyāl
   kālnilam tōyāk kaṭavuḷai - yāmnilam
   ceṉṉi yuṟavaṇaṅkic cēr tumem uḷḷattu
   muṉṉi yavaimuṭika eṉṟu.
   INVOCATION
   Knowing, like bow displayed in heav'n, man's advent here,
   To earth my head I bow, to God in truth draw near,
   Touch of whose foot earth never knew; thus what my mind
   Conceives, I pray may happy consummation find.
   This invocation is said to be by the Commentator Pathumanar.

                 pakuti 1. aṟattuppāl /PART I. ON VIRTUE
    atikāram 1. celva nilaiyāmai / Ch. 1. The Instability of Prosperity

   1.iṉṟu celvarāyiruppavar nāḷaip piccaiyeṭuppavar āvar
   aṟucuvai uṇṭi amarntillāḷ ūṭṭa
   maṟucikai nīkkiuṇ ṭārum — vaṟiñarāyc
   ceṉṟirappar ōriṭattuk kūḻeṉiṉ celvamoṉ
   ṟuṇṭāka vaikkaṟpāṟ ṟaṉṟu.
   Who today dine luxuriously tomorrow beg
   Those who ate erewhile, course after course, food of six flavours,
   supplied by their complaisant spouse, now roam as paupers and beg a
   mess of pottage here and there; if so, let wealth be counted as a thing
   of nought!
   2. celvam nilaiyātu. pakuttuṇṭu vāḻka.
   tukaḷtīr peruñcelvam tōṉṟiyakkāl toṭṭup
   pakaṭu naṭantakūḻ pallārō ṭuṇka
   akaṭuṟa yārmāṭṭum nillātu celvam
   cakaṭakkāl pōla varum.
   Wealth abides not, share it and enjoy
   When you own ample wealth acquired by blameless means, with many
   sharing eat the grain that steers have trodden out! In centre poised
   prosperity stands with no man, but revolves like the waggon's wheel.
   3. maṉṉarum taṉ nilai kulaintu māyvar.
   yāṉai yeruttam poliyak kuṭainiḻaṟkīḻc
   cēṉait talaivarāyc ceṉṟōrum — ēṉai
   viṉaiulappa vēṟāki vīḻvartām koṇṭa
   maṉaiyāḷai māṟṟār koḷa.
   Mighty warriors fall.
   Those who rode resplendent forth on the neck of an elephant, beneath
   the state umbrella's shade, as the leaders of the host, when 'other
   deeds' destroy, shallchange and fall, while foes lead away their wives
   as captives.
   4.poruḷkaḷ tolaikiṉṟaṉa. cāvu varukiṉṟatu.
   niṉṟaṉa niṉṟaṉa nillā eṉauṇarn
   toṉṟiṉa oṉṟiṉa vallē ceyiṉceyka
   ceṉṟaṉa ceṉṟaṉa vāḻnāḷ ceṟuttuṭaṉ
   vantatu vantatu kūṟṟu.
   Do your duty, knowing the instability of all things.Time flies! Death
   comes!
   The things of which you said, ‘they stand, they stand,' stand not; mark
   this, and perform what befits, yea! what befits, with all your power!
   Your days are gone, are gone! and death close pressing on is come, is
   come!
   5. muṉṉē aṟañceyka. piṉṉē cāvu varukiṉṟatu.
   eṉṉāṉum oṉṟutam kaiyuṟap peṟṟakkāṟ
   piṉṉāva teṉṟu piṭittirā — muṉṉē
   koṭuttār uyappōvar kōṭiltīk kūṟṟam
   toṭuttāṟu cellum curam.
   Give before death comes.
   When you have gained and hold in hand any single thing, retain it not
   with the thought, ‘This will serve some other day!’ Those who have
   given betimes shall escape the desert road along which death, an
   unyielding foe, drags his captives away.
   6. iṟattal tiṇṇam. aṟattaip purika.
   iḻaittanāḷ ellai ikavā piḻaittorīik
   kūṟṟam kutittuvantār īṅkillai — āṟṟap
   perumporuḷ vaittīr vaḻaṅkumiṉ nāḷait
   taḻīimtaḻīim taṇṇam paṭum.
   Death inevitable. Hoard not !
   Man's days pass not their assigned bound. None here on earth have ever
   escaped death's power, made off and got free. O hoarder of ample
   wealth, dispense it! On the morn the funeral drum will sound.
   7.māyvatai nīkka makkaḷāl muṭiyātu.
   tōṟṟamcāl ñāyiṟu nāḻiyā vaikalum
   kūṟṟam aḷantunum nāḷuṇṇum — āṟṟa
   aṟañcey taruḷuṭaiyīr ākumiṉ yārum
   piṟantum piṟavātā ril.
   Death inevitable.
   Death every day takes that fount of light the sun as a measure, metes
   out your days, and so devours.Do deeds of virtue full of kindly grace.
   Though all are born, none are exempt from death.
   8. celvam mēkattu miṉṉalaip pōṉṟatu.
   celvaryām eṉṟu tām celvuḻi eṇṇāta
   pullaṟi vāḷar peruñcelvam — elliṟ
   karuṅkoṇmū vāytiṟanta miṉṉuppōl tōṉṟi
   maruṅkaṟak keṭṭu viṭum.
   The wealth of the foolish like the lightning's flash.
   The ample wealth of men of mean understanding, who say, ' We're rich,'
   yet ponder not their path and end, appears, and perishes, and leaves no
   trace; like the flash, when the black thunder-cloud by night opens its
   mouth.
   9. īyātavaṉ poruḷ ellām iḻappāṉ
   uṇṇāṉ oḷiniṟāṉ ōṅkupukaḻ ceyyāṉ
   tuṉṉarum kēḷir tuyarkaḷaiyāṉ — koṉṉē
   vaḻaṅkāṉ poruḷkāt tiruppāṉēl aā
   iḻantāṉeṉ ṟeṇṇap paṭum.
   The miser loses all.
   He eats not, sheds no light of splendour around, performs no deeds that
   merit lofty praise, soothes no sorrow that choice friends feel, spends
   nought, but hoards his wealth in vain : “Aha! he's lost it all,' shall
   men pronounce.
   10. oṉṟum īyātavaṉ tēṉīyai yoppāṉ.
   uṭāatum uṇṇātum tamuṭampu ceṟṟum
   keṭāata nallaṟamum ceyyār — koṭāatu
   vaittīṭṭiṉāriḻappar vāṉtōy malaināṭa
   uyttīṭṭum tēṉīk kari.
   The miser like the honey-bee.
   Those who stint in clothes and food, and mortify their bodies, yet do
   not deeds of deathless virtue, and bestow nothing, hoarding shall
   suffer loss:— Lord of the cloud-capped hills !--this the hoarding
   honey-bee attests.
   ---------

              2. iḷamai nilaiyāmai / Ch. 2. Youth Abides Not

   11.iḷamaiyil oḻukkamuṭaṉ vāḻka. mutumai varuvatu uṟuti.
   naraivarum eṉṟeṇṇi nallaṟi vāḷar
   kuḻavi yiṭattē tuṟantār - puraitīrā
   maṉṉā iḷamai makiḻntārē kōlūṉṟi
   iṉṉāṅ keḻuntirup pār.
   Age will come. Be wise early
   "Grey eld will come,’—the wise remembering this renounce the world even
   in tender age; but they who joy in youth, unstable, never free from
   fault, shall erewhile painfully rise up leaning on a staff.
   12. ellām nilaiyillātaṉa.
   naṭpunār aṟṟaṉa nallārum aḵkiṉār
   aṟput taḷaiyum aviḻntaṉa — uṭkāṇāy
   vāḻtaliṉ ūtiyam eṉṉuṇṭām vantatē
   āḻkalat taṉṉa kali.
   All is vanity.
   Served are the ties of friendship; minished are the pleasant ones;
   love's bonds are loosened too; then look within and say, what profit is
   there in this joyous life of thine ? The cry comes up as from a sinking
   ship!
   13. maṉitarkku mūppupparuvam aḻakaik keṭukkum.
   coltaḷarntu kōlūṉṟic cōrnta naṭaiyiṉarāyp
   palkaḻaṉṟu paṇṭam paḻikāṟum - ilceṟintu
   kāma neṟipaṭarum kaṇṇiṉārk killaiyē
   ēma neṟipaṭaru māṟu.
   Men are loath to give up bodily pleasures.
   Speech falters, they lean on a staff, and walk tottering, their teeth
   fall out; yet, till the vessel (the body) is scorned by all, they
   linger in the house, still indulging fond desires; to these no way of
   safety opens out.
   14. iḷamaiyil num maṉaiyāḷ eḻil pārāṭṭiṉīr.
   tāḻāt taḷarāt talainaṭuṅkāt taṇṭuṉṟā
   vīḻā iṟakkum ivaḷmāṭṭum — kāḻilā
   mammarkoḷ māntark kaṇaṅkākun taṉkaikkōl
   ammaṉaikkō lākiya ñāṉṟu.
   The cherished wife of your youth.
   To men that cherish weak desire for her that's doomed to droop and
   fail, supporting her palsied limbs with a staff, and then to fall and
   pass away, what anguish comes, when she grasps in her hands the staff
   her mother held!
   15. talaimuṟai talaimuṟaiyāka iṟappum piṟappum toṭarntu varukiṉṟaṉa.
   eṉakkuttāyākiyāḷ eṉṉaiīṅ kiṭṭut
   taṉakkuttāy nāṭiyē ceṉṟāḷ — taṉakkuttāy
   āki yavaḷum atuvāṉāl tāyttāykkoṇ
   ṭēkum aḷittiv vulaku.
   Endless series of successive generations.
   My mother bare me, left me here, and went to seek her mother, who in
   the selfsame manner has gone in search; and thus in ceaseless round
   goes on the mother-quest. Such is the grace this world affords !
   16. paliyiṭum āṭu ilaiyuṇṭu makiḻvatu pōṉṟatu vāḻvu.
   veṟiayar veṅkaḷattu vēlmakaṉ pāṇi
   muṟiyār naṟuṅkaṇṇi muṉṉart tayaṅka
   maṟikuḷaku uṇṭaṉṉa maṉṉā makiḻcci
   aṟivuṭai yāḷarkaṇ il.
   The lamb before the sacrificer.
   The lamb in the ruddy slaughter-house will crop the fragrant shoots
   that dangle from the garland in the slayer's hand; such transient
   gladness of the thoughtless, youthful hour is never found amid the
   wise.
   17. paḻutta paḻam maṭṭum utirātu. iḷamaiyilum maṉitar iṟappar.
   paṉipaṭu cōlaip payaṉmara mellām
   kaṉiutirntu vīḻntaṟ ṟiḷamai — naṉiperitum
   vēṟkaṇṇaḷ eṉṟivaḷai veḵkaṉmiṉ maṟṟivaḷum
   kōṟkaṇṇa ḷākum kuṉintu.
   Fruit only ripens to fall. Youth leads to decay.
   The sweet fruit from every tree that bears in the dewy grove must fall
   to earth. Thus youth decays. Desire not her whose eyes gleam bright as
   darts. Full soon she too will walk bent down, with a staff to aid her
   dim sight.
   18. eṉ uṭal nalam mēlum mēlum māṟivarum. oru nilaiyillātatu.
   paruvam eṉaittuḷa palliṉpāl ēṉai
   irucikaiyum uṇṭīrō eṉṟu—varicaiyāl
   uḷnāṭṭam koḷḷap paṭutalāl yākkaikkōḷ
   eṇṇār aṟivuṭai yār.
   Constant anxieties about health.
   ’How old are you ?' 'How last your teeth ?' and, ‘Do you eat two
   courses yet?' men ask with kindly courtesy. By such close questions
   urged, the wise will learn to judge the body as a thing of nought.
   19. nāḷaik kaṭattātu nalviṉai cey
   maṟṟaṟivām nalviṉai yāmiḷaiyam eṉṉātu
   kaittuṇṭām pōḻtē karavā taṟañceymmiṉ
   muṟṟi yirunta kaṉiyoḻiyat tīvaḷiyāl
   naṟkāy utirtalum uṇṭu.
   Against Procrastination.
   Say not, 'in after time we'll learn virtue, we're young;' but while
   wealth is yours conceal it not; do virtuous deeds. When evil tempests
   rage, not the ripe fruit alone, but the unripe fruit's fair promise
   also falls.
   20.tāy alaṟap piḷḷaiyaik kūṟṟuvaṉ kolkiṟāṉ.
   āḷpārt tuḻalum aruḷilkūṟ ṟuṇmaiyāl
   tōḷkōppuk kālattāl koṇṭuymmiṉ —pīḷpitukkip
   piḷḷaiyait tāyalaṟak kōṭalāl maṟṟataṉ
   kaḷḷam kaṭaippiṭittal naṉṟu.
   The infant slain by death.
   Relentless death is roaming round, and eyes his man! 'Tis true. Take up
   your wallet, scape betimes. He bears away the new-born babe, while the
   mother sorely laments. It is good to bear in mind his guile.
   --------

        3. yākkai nilaiyāmai / Ch. 3. The Bodily Frame Endures Not

   21. valimaiyuṭaiya maṉṉarum maṇmēl maṭivār.
   malaimicait tōṉṟum matiyam pōl yāṉait
   talaimicaik koṇṭa kuṭaiyar — nilamicait
   tuñciṉār eṉṟeṭuttut tūṟṟappaṭ ṭārallāl
   eñciṉār ivvulakat til.
   Mighty kings die.
   Even kings that rode on elephants beneath the state umbrella's shade,
   like the moon appearing over some bill, have had their names proclaimed
   on earth as dead ;— not any in this world have escaped.
   22. vāḻ nāḷ paṟantōṭukiṉṟatu. makkaṭpiṟappiṟkuriya payaṉai nāṭuka.
   vāḻnāṭ kalakā vayaṅkoḷi maṇṭilam
   vīḻnāḷ paṭāa teḻutalāl — vāḻnāḷ
   ulavāmuṉ oppura vāṟṟumiṉ yārum
   nilavār nilamicai mēl.
   Time is fleeting,—use it
   As the measure of your days the shining orb each day unfailing rises;
   so before your joyous days have passed away, perform ye 'fitting deeds
   of grace'; for none abide on earth.
   23. ulakil tuṉpamum iṉpamum māṟi māṟi varum.
   maṉṟam kaṟaṅka maṇappaṟai yāyiṉa
   aṉṟavark kāṅkē piṇappaṟaiyāyp — piṉṟai
   olittalum uṇṭāmeṉ ṟuyntupōm āṟē
   valikkumām māṇṭār maṉam.
   Mutability of earthly joys.
   The marriage drums that sounded out in the festive hall, there and that
   very day have served for him as funeral drums! Men of lofty minds will
   note that thus it haps, and will strive to gain the way to escape.
   24. iṟantapiṉ paṟai koṭṭum iyalpu.
   ceṉṟē eṟipa orukāl ciṟuvarai
   niṉṟē eṟipa paṟaiyiṉai — naṉṟēkāṇ
   mukkālaik koṭṭiṉuḷ mūṭittīk koṇṭeḻuvar
   cettāraic cāvār cumantu.
   The funeral.
   They march and then strike once! A little while they wait, then strike
   the drum a second time. Behold, how fine! The third stroke sounds. They
   veil it, take the fire, and go forth :—the dying bear the deed!
   25. makkaḷ vāḻvil iṉpam illaiyeṉṟu cāppaṟai cāṟṟukiṉṟatu.
   kaṇam koṇṭu cuṟṟattār kalleṉ ṟalaṟap (ṭīṇ
   piṇamkoṇṭu kāṭṭuyppārk kaṇṭum - maṇaṅkoṇ
   ṭuṇṭuṇṭuṇ ṭeṉṉum uṇarviṉāṟ cāṟṟumē
   ṭoṇṭoṇṭo ṭeṉṉum paṟai.
   Death pours contempt on human joys.
   To him, who, although he sees them bear the corpse to the burning
   ground, while friends in troops loudly lament, boldly asserts that
   wedded life is bliss on earth, the funeral drum speaks out, and mocks
   his vain utterance.
   26. uyir pirintapiṉ uṭampaip pōṟṟuvatu aṟiyāmai.
   nārttoṭut tīrkkileṉ naṉṟāyn taṭakkileṉ
   pārttuḻip peyyileṉ pallōr paḻikkileṉ
   tōṟpaiyuḷ niṉṟu toḻilaṟac ceytūṭṭum
   kūttaṉ puṟappaṭṭak kāl.
   The dead body
   When the 'soul', that, taking its stand in this skin clad frame, has
   fully wrought its works, and partaken of life's experiences, has gone
   forth, what matters it whether you attach ropes to the body and drag it
   away, or carefully bury it, or throw it aside in any place you light
   upon, or if many revile the departed ?
   27. nīrkkumiḻipōla nillātu uṭal.
   paṭumaḻai mokkuḷil palkālum tōṉṟik
   keṭumitōr yākkaiyeṉ ṟeṇṇit - taṭumāṟṟam
   tīrppēmyām eṉṟuṇarum tiṇṇaṟi vāḷarai
   nērppāryār nīḷnilattiṉ mēl.
   The body a bubble
   'Like a bubble, that in pelting rain appears full oft, and disappears,
   is this our frame.' So sages have judged, steadfast in wisdom, and have
   decided to end this dubious strife. On this wide earth who equal these?
   28. malaiyiṟ paṭarum mañcupōl maṟaiyum uṭal.
   yākkaiyai yāppuṭaittāp peṟṟavar tāmpeṟṟa
   yākkaiyā lāya payaṉkoḷka — yākkai
   malaiyāṭu mañcupōl tōṉṟimaṟ ṟāṅkē
   nilaiyātu nīttu viṭum.
   The body like a cloud on the hillside.
   Those who've gained and held fast by this well-knit frame (a human
   body) should take the gain the body they have gained is intended to
   yield. Like a cloud that wanders over the hills, the body here appears,
   and abiding not, departs leaving no trace behind.
   29. pulnuṉip paṉipōl uṭal viḻum
   pulnuṉimēl nīrpōl nilaiyāmai eṉṟeṇṇi
   iṉṉiṉiyē ceyka aṟaviṉai — iṉṉiṉiyē
   niṉṟāṉ iruntāṉ kiṭantāṉtaṉ kēḷalaṟac
   ceṉṟāṉ eṉappaṭuta lāl.
   The body like dew on the tip of a blade of grass.
   Considering that all things are transient as the dew-drop on the tip of
   a blade of grass, now, now at once, do virtuous deeds! "Even now he
   stood, he sat, he fell—while his kindred cried aloud he died :' such is
   man's history!
   30. cuṟṟattār cūḻnta toṭarpu nilaiyaṉṟu.
   kēḷātē vantu kiḷaikaḷāy iltōṉṟi
   vāḷātē pōvarāl māntarkaḷ — vāḷātē
   cēkkai maraṉoḻiyac cēṇnīṅku puḷpōla
   yākkai tamarkkoḻiya nīttu.
   All human relationships merely temporary.
   Unasked men come, appear in the home as kinsmen, and then silently go.
   As the bird silently deserts the tree where its nest yet remains, and
   goes far off, so these leave but their body to their friends.
   -----------

           4. aṟaṉvali yuṟuttal / Ch. 4. The Might of Virtue

   31. piccaikkārar piṟarvācal niṟpār
   akattārē vāḻvāreṉ ṟaṇṇāntu nōkkip
   pukattām peṟāar puṟaṅkaṭai paṟṟi
   mikattām varunti iruppārē mēlait
   tavattāl tavañceyyā tār.
   The door closed. Too late.
   ‘Yet those within are blest,' so saying, they look up, but obtain no
   entrance: their place is at the outer gate. There will they suffer
   much, who thro' lack of former penitence do no penance now. [In a
   former state penance won for them a human shape. As men they have now
   failed.]
   32. vāḻnāḷ kaḻiyum. varunti aṟam cey.
   āvānām ākkam nacaii aṟammaṟantu
   pōvā nām eṉṉāp pulaineñcē — ōvātu
   niṉṟuñaṟṟi vāḻti eṉiṉumniṉ vāḻnāḷkaḷ
   ceṉṟaṉa ceyva turai.
   What wilt thou do in the end thereof?
   Say not, O silly soul, we will live desiring wealth and die forgetting
   virtue! We'll say that ceaselessly toiling thou shalt live long; but
   tell me, what wilt thou do when all thy happy days are over?
   33. viṉaippayaṉ tuṉpamāy viḷaivatu eṉṟaṟika.
   viṉaippayaṉ vantakkāl veyya uyirā
   maṉattiṉ aḻiyumām pētai - niṉaittataṉait
   tollaiya teṉṟuṇar vārē taṭumāṟṟat
   tellai ikantoruvu vār.
   The wise accept the sorrows of life as retributive.
   When the ‘fruit of deeds' is come, the fool sighs heavily, and all his
   soul dies out; but those who reflect and say, ,'Tis old desert,' will
   pass beyond the bound of life's perplexity, and escape (by devoting
   themselves to virtue).
   34. piṟappiṉ payaṉ aṟattaip purivatē.
   arumpeṟal yākkaiyaip peṟṟa payattāl
   perumpayaṉum āṟṟavē koḷka — karumpūrnta
   cāṟupōl cālavum piṉutavi maṟṟataṉ
   kōtupōl pōkum uṭampu.
   Virtue is the gain. The body mere refuse.
   As the gain from the mortal frame now reached —and which is so hard to
   reach —with all thy might lay hold of virtue's lasting good. As the
   juice expressed from the sugar-cane 'twill afterwards be thine aid,
   when the body goes like refuse flung away.
   35. aṟappayaṉ aṭaintōr iṟappataṟku añcār.
   karumpāṭṭik kaṭṭi ciṟukālaik koṇṭār
   turumpeḻuntu vēmkāl tuyarāṇ ṭuḻavār
   varunti uṭampiṉ payaṉkoṇṭār kūṟṟam
   varuṅkāl pariva tilar.
   The same. The body only sapless stalks.
   Those who have pressed the sugar-cane, and early taken the juice, when
   the refuse heaped up burns, will suffer no grief: those who have toiled
   and gained the fruit won from embodied existence will feel no pangs
   when death shall come.
   36. cāvu neruṅkiyatu tarmam purika.
   iṉṟukol aṉṟukol eṉṟukol eṉṉātu
   piṉṟaiyē niṉṟatu kūṟṟameṉ ṟeṇṇi
   oruvumiṉ tīyavai ollum vakaiyāl
   maruvumiṉ māṇṭār aṟam.
   Death stands waiting behind you. Delay not!
   ‘This day ?’ That day? What day? O question not the time! Bethink you
   death stands behind you ever waiting! Put from you every evil thing;
   and with all your powers embrace the virtue which sages teach.
   37. uyirkaṭkuṟuti nalviṉai oṉṟē.
   makkaḷā lāya perumpayaṉum āyuṅkāl
   ettuṇaiyum āṟṟap palavāṉāl — tokka
   uṭampiṟkē oppuravu ceytoḻukā tumpark
   kiṭantuṇṇap paṇṇap paṭum.
   Use the body to gain the world to come.
   When you examine closely the mighty gains to be acquired by birth in a
   human shape, if they seem manifold, perform not deeds which suit the
   body's frame alone, but deeds whose fruit is joy in the world to come!
   38. takkārkku utavuvatu mikka payaṉ viḷaikkum.
   uṟakkum tuṇaiyatōr ālamvit tīṇṭi
   iṟappa niḻalpayan tāaṅku — aṟappayaṉum
   tāṉ ciṟitāyiṉum takkārkaip paṭṭakkāl
   vāṉciṟitāp pōrttu viṭum.
   A benefit conferred by the worthy on the worthy.
   The banyan seed, though it be minute as one might see in dreams, grows
   to a mighty tree of amplest shade; so gifts from a virtuous hand,
   received by a worthy hand, though small, will hide the diminish'd
   heavens.
   39. vāḻnāḷ kaḻivatu kaṇṭu varuntuka.
   vaikalum vaikal varakkaṇṭum aḵtuṇarār
   vaikalum vaikalai vaikumeṉ ṟiṉpuṟuvar
   vaikalum vaikaltam vāḻnāḷmēl vaittal
   vaikalai vaittuṇarā tār.
   Days pass.
   Daily they see the passing day added to the sum of the days gone by, as
   a day that is spent from out the store of their days, yet daily, as
   they see day dawn, they say joyously, 'This day will abide with us till
   the close of day?’
   40. irantuyir vāḻvatai iḻivueṉa viṭuka.
   māṉa aruṅkalam nīkki iraveṉṉum
   īṉa iḷiviṉāl vāḻvēṉmaṉ — īṉattāl
   ūṭṭiyak kaṇṇum uṟuticērn tivvuṭampu
   nīṭṭittu niṟkum eṉiṉ.
   Why should man maintain the perishable body by dishonourable begging ?
   Parting with honour's jewel I might still consent to live a suppliant's
   life of shame, if when maintained by such disgrace, this body could
   abide in strength and last for length of days.
   --------------

                      5. tūytaṉmai / Ch. 5. Impurity

   41. mēṟṟōl nīṅkiṉāl nāṟṟamām uṭampu.
   mākkēḻ maṭanallāy eṉṟaraṟṟum cāṉṟavar
   nōkkārkol noyyatōr pukkilai[#]— yākkaikkōr
   īcciṟa kaṉṉatōr tōlaṟiṉum vēṇṭumē
   kākkai kaṭivatōr kōl.
   Any slight wound may fester, and reduce the fairest form to a loathsome
   state.
   ‘O gentle maiden, fair and good !' These paragons that thus rave, know
   they not 'the heavenly home invisible?’ Let a bit of skin be broken
   slight as an insect's wing, and you need the stick that drives a way
   the crows !
   [#] (pāṭam) tuccilai.
   42. mātar uṭal kaṇṭu mayaṅkal ākātu.
   tōṟpōrvai mēlum toḷaipalavāyp poymmaṟaikku
   mīppōrvai māṭcit tuṭampāṉāl — mīppōrvai
   poymmaṟaiyāk kāmam pukalātu maṟṟataṉaip
   paimmaṟiyāp pārkkap paṭum.
   The body's beauty only skin - deep.
   If the body which, with a covering of skin above, possesses many
   apertures, owes its beauty only to that outward cloak that veils the
   false (the inner foulness), then is it fitting to say no word of
   lustful desire which hides the false from itself by the covering veil,
   but to regard that body as an undeveloped embryo.
   43. oppaṉaiyāl uṭal aḻukku nīṅkātu.
   takkōlam tiṉṟu talai niṟaiyap pūccūṭip
   poykkōlam ceyya oḻiyumē — ekkālum
   uṇṭi viṉaiyuḷ uṟaikkum eṉapperiyōr
   kaṇṭukai viṭṭa mayal.
   Outward adornment is not inward purification.
   Will impurity ever cease from the worthless body which the great have
   abandoned, knowing it to be reeking with odours from processes
   connected with nutrition, though aromatics be chewed, the head covered
   with garlands, and the body adornedwith false splendour?
   44. kaṟṟōr peṇkaḷiṉ kaṇkaṇṭu mayaṅkār
   teṇṇīrk kuvaḷai porukayal vēleṉṟu
   kaṇṇilpuṉ mākkaḷ kavaṟṟa viṭuvēṉō
   uṇṇīr kaḷaintakkāl nuṅkucūṉ ṟiṭṭaṉṉa
   kaṇṇīrmai kaṇṭoḻuku vēṉ.
   Female eyes shall not bewilder me !
   Shall I abandon (my ascetic purpose) because blind, low men worry me,
   saying (that woman's eye is like) the water-lily in the clear stream,
   or the warring carp, or a javelin? I will pursue my virtuous way as
   having seen (that) the eye's real nature (is), like (that of) the
   palm-tree fruit (which is) scooped out, after the water has been
   drained off!
   45. maṅkaiyar palleḻilil mayaṅkuvar aṟivilār.
   mullai mukaimuṟuval mutteṉ ṟivaipitaṟṟum
   kallāppuṉ mākkaḷ kavaṟṟa viṭuvēṉō
   ellāruṅ kāṇap puṟaṅkāṭ ṭutirntukka
   palleṉpu kaṇṭoḻuku vēṉ.
   The beauty of women's teeth shall not bewilder me.
   Though worthless men untaught should fret my soul and rave of teeth
   like jasmine buds and pearls, shall I forego my fixed resolve, who have
   seen in the burning ground those bones—the fallen teeth —strewn round
   for all to see ?
   46. kuṭarmutal uṟuppukkaḷ kūṭiyatu uṭampu.
   kuṭarum koḻuvum kurutiyum eṉpun
   toṭarum narampoṭu tōlum — iṭaiyiṭaiyē
   vaitta taṭiyum valampumām maṟṟivaṟṟuḷ
   ettiṟattāḷ īrṅkōtai yāḷ.
   'This vile body.'
   (The body) is entrails, and marrow, and blood, and bone, and connecting
   tendons, and skin, and here and there flesh interposed, and fat. In the
   midst of these, what sort of a being is she who wears the fresh
   garlands?
   47. maṅkaiyar mēl aḻaku maiyalai viḷaikkum.
   ūṟi uvarttakka oṉpatu vāyppulaṉum
   kōtik kuḻampalaikkum kumpattaip —pētai
   peruntōḷi peyvaḷāy eṉṉumīp pōrtta
   karuntōlāl kaṇviḷakkap paṭṭu.
   The body disgusting.
   The fool will address the earthen pot (the body), from which defilement
   oozes, which from nine disgusting outlets scatters pollution, and in
   which slimy liquids move to and fro—and say, 'O thou of the rounded
   arms,' ‘O thou with armlets decked, ‘—because it is made bright to his
   eyes by a covering of black skin.
   48. cantaṉam pūuṭal cārttiṉum payaṉilai.
   paṇṭam aṟiyār paṭucāntum kōtaiyum
   [#]koṇṭupārāṭṭuvār kaṇṭilarkol - maṇṭip
   peṭaiccēval vaṉkaḻuku pērttiṭṭuk kuttum[§]
   muṭaiccākā ṭacciṟ ṟuḻi .
   The body a prey to corruption.
   They know not what the body is; with sandal paste and flowers they make
   it fine. Have they not seen, I pray, the vultures and their mates in
   flocks with busy beaks devour the body foul when the chariot-axle is
   snapt?
   [#] (pāṭam) kaṇṭu. [§]kuttaṉ.
   49. vāḻviṉ iḻivai maṇṭaiyōṭu kāṭṭum.
   kaḻintār iṭutalai kaṇṭārneñ cuṭkak
   kuḻintāḻnta kaṇṇavāyt tōṉṟi — oḻintāraip
   pōṟṟi neṟiniṉmiṉ iṟṟitaṉ paṇpeṉṟu
   cāṟṟuṅkol cālac cirittu.
   The eyeless skulls teach.
   The skulls of the dead, at the sight of which the gazer fears, with
   deep cavernous eyes appear, and grinning say to those who still
   survive, 'Guard well! In virtue's path stand fast. This is the body's
   grace and worth.''
   50. iṭukāṭṭu veṇṭalai nam iṟumāppu nīkkum
   uyirpōyār veṇṭalai uṭkac cirittuc
   ceyirtīrkkum cemmāp pavaraic — ceyirtīrntār
   kaṇṭiṟ ṟitaṉvaṇṇam eṉpataṉāl tammaiyōr
   paṇṭattuḷ vaippatilar.
   The sight of the skulls cures pride.
   The skulls of the dead, grinning so as to excite disgust, cure the vain
   lovers of life of their folly. Those who are cured of this folly,
   seeing (the skulls in the burning ground), say “such is this body,' and
   so value themselves as nothing.
   --------------

                      6. tuṟavu / Ch. 6. Renunciation

   51. tavattiṉmuṉ pāvam nillātu.
   viḷakkup pukairuḷ māyntāṅ koruvaṉ
   tavattiṉmuṉ nillātām pāvam — viḷakku ney
   tēyviṭattuc ceṉṟiruḷ pāyntāṅku nalviṉai
   tīrviṭattu niṟkumām tītu.
   Penitence puts sin to flight.
   As when a lamp enters darkness dies, so sin stands not before man's
   penitence. As, when in a lamp the oil wastes, darkness rushes in, so
   evil takes its stand where deeds of virtue cease.
   52. kaṇitam ilakkaṇam kaṟpatiṟ payaṉillai. kaṭamai ceyka.
   nilaiyāmai nōymūppuc cākkāṭeṉ ṟeṇṇit
   talaiyāyār taṅkarumañ ceyvār — tolaivillāc
   cattamum cōtiṭamum eṉṟāṅ kivaipitaṟṟum
   pittariṉ pētaiyār il.
   Put away useless studies.
   The chief of men reflect on change, disease, old age, and death, and do
   their needful work. Those who raving teach the endless round of
   sevenfold science, and the lore of stars, are maddest of the foolish
   throng.
   53. ellāp poruḷkaḷum nillā vulakil.
   illam iḷamai eḻilvaṉappu mīkkūṟṟam
   celvam valieṉ ṟivaiyellām — mella
   nilaiyāmai kaṇṭu neṭiyār tuṟappar
   talaiyāyār tāmuyyak koṇṭu.
   Renunciation at once.
   The chief of men in quite thought discern how house, and youth, and
   beauty's grace, and high estate, and wealth, and strength, all pass
   away; and thus, to save themselves, prolonging not the time, renounce
   all these.
   54. tuṉpavāḻvu ituveṉṟu tuṟappar mēlōr.
   tuṉpam palanāḷ uḻantum orunāḷai
   iṉpamē kāmuṟuvar ēḻaiyār — iṉpam
   iṭaiterin tiṉṉāmai nōkki maṉaiyā
   ṟaṭaivoḻintār āṉṟamain tār.
   Pleasure and pain.
   Though wretched men suffer afflictions many a day, yet one day's
   delight they eagerly desire. The men of calm and full wisdom, in
   pleasure's core see pain, and quit the pleasant household paths.
   55. mūppunōy varuvataṉ muṉtuṟavu pēṇuka.
   koṉṉē kaḻintaṉ ṟiḷamaiyum iṉṉē
   piṇiyoṭu mūppum varumāl — tuṇivoṉṟi
   eṉṉoṭu cūḻā teḻuneñcē pōtiyō
   naṉṉeṟi cēra namakku.
   Unreflecting soul, why not seek the way of peace?
   In vain is my youth spent. Even now disease and old age will come. O
   soul ! be bold; wrangle no more with me, but rise! Wilt thou not go
   where both thou and I may gain virtue's path?
   56. vaṟumai kuṟittēṉum tuṟavu koḷka .
   māṇṭa kuṇattōṭu makkaṭpēṟilleṉiṉum
   pūṇṭāṉ kaḻittaṟ karumaiyāl — pūṇṭa
   miṭieṉṉum kāraṇattiṉ mēṉmuṟaik kaṇṇē
   kaṭieṉṟār kaṟṟaṟin tār.
   Marriage to be dreaded.
   Though your wife possess no excellence and bear no child, it is hard to
   get rid of the marriage bond. For this cause since he who weds puts
   sorrow on, in olden days the learned made marriage a synonym of dread.
   57. tuṉpam poṟuttut tuṟavu mēṟkoḷka.
   ūkkittām koṇṭa virataṅkaḷ uḷḷuṭaiyat
   tākkarun tuṉpaṅkaḷ tāmtalai vantakkāl
   nīkki niṟūum uravōrē nalloḻukkam
   kākkum tiruvat tavar.
   Patience and perseverance.
   When troubles arise, hard to resist, to cause them to break the vows
   which their lofty spirits have pledged, the men of power set griefs
   aside and firmly fix their souls in right. These are the blessed,
   guarding decorum's rule.
   58. tammai ikaḻntālum poṟuppatutāṉ tavam.
   tammai ikaḻntamai tāmpōṟuppa taṉṟimaṟ
   ṟemmai ikaḻnta viṉaippayattāl — ummai
   erivāy nirayattu vīḻvarkol eṉṟu
   parivatūum cāṉṟōr kaṭaṉ.
   Forbearance and pity for evil-doers.
   To bear with those that speak contemptuous words; yea, more, to say,
   'Ah, will these sink in the other world to hell, the place of fire, as
   fruit of their contemptuous words;' and to grieve, is duty of the
   perfect man.
   59. aimpulaṉ aṭakkiṉōr muttiyai yaṭaivār.
   meyvāykaṇ mūkkuc ceviyeṉap pērpeṟṟa
   aivāya vēṭkai avāviṉaik — kaivāy
   kalaṅkāmaṟ kāttuykkum āṟṟaluṭaiyāṉ
   vilaṅkātu vīṭu peṟum.
   Repression of sensuous emotions.
   He who undisturbed, in the ordered way of right, has power to guard and
   guide the desires and lusts that find entrance by the five sense-gates,
   called 'body, mouth, eye, nose, and ear' - unfailing shall gain
   'release.'
   60. tuṉpaṅ kaṇṭu tuṟappār mēlōr.
   tuṉpamē mītūrak kaṇṭum tuṟavuḷḷār
   iṉpamē kāmuṟuvar ēḻaiyār — iṉmam
   icaitoṟum maṟṟataṉ iṉṉāmai nōkkip
   pacaital pariyātām mēl.
   The bitter pleasures of life.
   Though wretched men behold afflictions urge and press, renunciation is
   not in their thoughts; delight they eagerly desire. The great in every
   joy behold its pain, and seek it not.
   -----

         7. ciṉamiṉmai / Ch. 7. The Absence of Anger : Meekness

   61. matittālum ikaḻntālum maṉaṅkoḷḷār mēlōr.
   matittiṟap pārum iṟakka matiyā
   mitittiṟap pārum iṟakka - mitittēṟi
   īyum talaimēl iruttalāl aḵtaṟivār
   kāyum katamiṉmai naṉṟu.
   Disregard of the esteem or disesteem of men.
   Who pass esteeming us, let them pass on! And those who contemn and
   trample on us as they pass, let them too pass on! If even a fly
   (especially unclean) should climb, trampling on their head, it is well
   that the wise who know its worth, should feel no wrath.
   62. kōpam variṉum poṟumai koḷka.
   taṇṭāc ciṟappiṉtam iṉṉuyirait tāṅkātu
   kaṇṭuḻi yellām tuṟappavō — maṇṭi
   aṭipeyarā tāṟṟa iḷivanta pōḻtiṉ
   muṭikiṟkum uḷḷat tavar.
   Resolute men bear meekly the evils of life.
   Although disgraces throng thickly, and may not be repulsed, will those
   whose minds are set upon finishing the work begun, renounce sweet
   life's unfailing worth in their impatience, whenever they see (evils)?
   63. paḻitturaippōraiyum paḻiyār aṟiñar.
   kāvā toruvaṉtaṉ vāytiṟantu collumcol
   ōvātē taṉṉaic cuṭutalāl –- ōvātē
   āyntamainta kēḷvi aṟivuṭaiyār eññāṉṟum
   kāyntamainta collār kaṟuttu.
   Rashness in speech hurts one's self.
   If a man open his mouth and speak unguarded words, his words will
   ceaselessly burn his soul. The wise who ceaselessly hear, and ponder
   well and calmly, even in their wrath, will never give utterance to
   words of fire.
   64. kīḻmakkaḷ kōpam mēṉmēṟ kiḷarntu eḻum.
   nērttu nikarallār nīralla colliyakkāl
   vērttu vekuḷār viḻumiyōr - ōrttataṉai
   uḷḷattāṉ uḷḷi uraitturāy ūrkēṭpat
   tuḷḷittūṇ muṭṭumām kīḻ.
   The good man's meekness. The low man's ungoverned fury.
   When men who are beneath them confront them, and speak unseemly words,
   the excellent wax not hot with anger. The base man will brood over it,
   chafe and rave for all the town to hear, and leap, and dash his head
   against a post.
   65. iḷaiyāṉ aṭakkam, illāṉ koṭai, valiyavaṉ poṟumai mūṉṟum ciṟantaṉa.
   iḷaiyāṉ aṭakkam aṭakkam kiḷaiporuḷ
   illāṉ koṭaiyē koṭaippayaṉ — ellām
   oṟukkum matukai uraṉuṭai yāḷaṉ
   poṟukkum poṟaiyē poṟai.
   Self-restraint in youth, gifts from the poor, and forbearance in the
   mighty are excellent.
   The young man's self-restraint is self-restraint. The gift of him who
   owns no stores of wealth is gift indeed. When wan has means and might
   to punish every fault, if he forbear, call him the patient man.
   66. kīḻmakkaḷ paḻippiṉum mēṉmakkaḷ poṟuppar
   kaleṟin taṉṉa kayavarvāy iṉṉāccol
   ellāruṅ kāṇap poṟuttuyppar — ollai
   iṭunīṟṟāl paiavinta nākampōl tattam
   kuṭimaiyāṉ vātikkap paṭṭu.
   Noble instinct restrains.
   As stones the base shower down their bitter words: the noble bear, in
   sight of all, and let them pass, by sense of noble worth constrained :
   like serpent's crest at once by touch of sacred ash subdued.
   67. piṟarkkut tuṉpam puriyār periyār.
   māṟṟārāy niṉṟutam māṟēṟpārk kēlāmai
   āṟṟāmai eṉṉār aṟivuṭaiyār — āṟṟāmai
   nērttiṉṉā maṟṟavar ceytakkāl tāmavaraip
   pērttiṉṉā ceyyāmai naṉṟu.
   Return not evil for evil.
   When men stand forth as our enemies, and would begin the conflict, to
   decline the strife is not, in the language of the wise, lack of power.
   Even when men have confronted and done us intolerable evils, it is good
   not to do them evil in return.
   68. cāṉṟōr kōpam tāṉē taṇiyum.
   neṭuṅkālam ōṭiṉum nīcar vekuḷi
   keṭuṅkālam iṉṟip pākkum — aṭuṅkālai
   nīrkoṇṭa veppampōl tāṉē taṇiyumē
   cīrkoṉṭa cāṉṟōr ciṉam.
   The wrath of the base never expends itself. That of the good of itself
   dies out. Long time though base men's wrath run on, it spreads abroad,
   and knows no time when heat is spent; as the heat of water, when boiled
   at cooking time, itself grow's cool, the ire of perfect men of worth
   abates.
   69. naṟkuṭip piṟantōr naṉmaiyē ceyvār.
   upakāram ceytataṉai ōrātē taṅkaṇ
   apakāram āṟṟar ceyiṉum — upakāram
   tāñceyva tallāl tavaṟṟiṉāl tīṅkūkkal
   vāṉtōy kuṭippiṟantārk kil.
   It is not the way of the noble to do evil to those who injure them.
   Though men think not of good received, and do much ill to men of family
   whose fame has touched the sky, these still do good; nor are they wont
   provoked by faults, to render evil to the thankless ones.
   70. mēṉmakkaḷ vāyil tāḻntacol veḷippaṭā.
   kūrttunāy kauvik koḷakkaṇṭum tamvāyāl
   pērttunāy kauviṉār īṅkillai — nīrttaṉṟik
   kīḻmakkaḷ kīḻāy colliyakkāl colpavō
   mēṉmakkaḷ tamavāyāl mīṭṭu.
   Return not railing for railing.
   Though a dog, in range, should lay hold of them, there are none in the
   world who, in return, would lay hold of it with their mouth; and thus,
   when low men speak, not what is fitting, but low words, will
   high-minded men, in reply, utter such words with their mouth.
   ----------

                   8. poṟaiyuṭaimai / Ch. 8. Patience

   71. aṟivilārōṭu uraiyāṭutal tītu.
   kōtai yaruvik kuḷirvarai naṉṉāṭa!
   pētaiyō ṭiyātum uraiyaṟka — pētai
   uraippiṟ citainturaikkum ollum vakaiyāṉ
   vaḻukkik kaḻitalē naṉṟu.
   Don't argue with the foolish.
   Lord of the pleasant land, where down the cool mountains the streams
   fall as garlands!— With a fool hold no converse. If you speak with him,
   in replying he will pervert your words. To slip away from him as best
   you can is well.
   72. pollāruraiyaiyum poṟuppatē perumai.
   nērallār nīralla colliyakkāl maṟṟatu
   tārittiruttal takutimaṟ —ṟōrum
   pukaḻmaiyāk koḷḷātu poṅkunīr ñālam
   camaḻmaiyāk koṇṭu viṭum.
   Insults from inferiors.
   When persons not our equals say unfitting things, to bear and to be
   still is worthy conduct. The world girt by foaming waters regards not a
   contrary course as praise-worthy, but as discreditable.
   73. aṉpar kaṭuñcollum naṉmai payakkum
   kātalār colluṅ kaṭuñcol uvanturaikkum
   ētilār iṉcoliṉ tītāmō — pōtelām
   mātarvaṇ ṭārkkum malikaṭal taṇcērppa!
   āva taṟivārp peṟiṉ.
   Harsh words of those who love are better than complaisant words of
   foes.
   Lord of the swelling sea's cool shore, where bright insects hum around
   every flower!—Are severe words from loving lips harder to bear, if men
   can only rightly estimate their result, than pleasant words that
   strangers courteously speak?
   74. naṉmai ceyvōṉ ennāḷum makiḻvāṉ.
   aṟiva taṟintaṭaṅki añcuva tañci
   uṟuva tulakuvappac ceytu — peṟuvataṉāl
   iṉpuṟṟu vāḻum iyalpiṉār eññāṉṟun
   tuṉpuṟṟu vāḻtal aritu.
   The thoroughly disciplined and contented man is happy.
   Those who know what should be known and rule themselves thereby; who
   fear what should be feared ; who use all their faculties to bless the
   world; and whose nature rejoices in all good gained: are for ever free
   from woes.
   75. vēṟṟumai naṭpait tūṟṟātu viṭuka.
   vēṟṟumai yiṉṟik kalantiruvar naṭṭakkāl
   tēṟṟā voḻukkam oruvaṉkaṇ uṇṭāyiṉ
   āṟṟun tuṇaiyum poṟukka ; poṟāṉāyiṉ
   tūṟṟātē tūra viṭal.
   If a friend act doubtfully, forgive or quietly withdraw.
   When two with strict accord unite in friendship's bond, if one betray
   the other's confidence by unkind act, this latter should endure as best
   he may. And if he can't endure, he should not divulge it, but withdraw
   himself.
   76. tuṉpam ceyyiṉum naṇpaṉai viṭātē.
   iṉṉā ceyiṉum iṉiya oḻikeṉṟu
   taṉṉaiyē tāṉnōviṉ allatu — tuṉṉik
   kalantāraik kaiviṭutal, kāṉaka nāṭa!
   vilaṅkiṟkum viḷḷal aritu.
   If a friend do evil to you, think it good, refrain from anger and blame
   yourself ;
   but never forsake him.
   Lord of the woodlands! Separation is hard even to beasts; therefore if
   friends do things that are unpleasant, think them pleasant. bid
   yourself cease (from wrath), and blame yourself alone; but forsake not
   those that have been joined to you in the intimacy of friendship.
   77. periyōr naṭpiṟ piḻai poṟuppavarē.
   periyār perunaṭpuk kōṭaltām ceyta
   ariya poṟuppaeṉ ṟaṉṟō — ariyarō
   oleṉ aruvi uyarvarai naṉṉāṭa!
   nallacey vārkkut tamar.
   Forbearance cements friendship.
   Is not the reason why the close friendship of the great is sought, that
   they will bear even with faults hard to endure? Lord of the good land
   of high mountains, with resounding waterfalls! — to good people are
   intimate friends rare?
   78. kuṟai nīkkuvōriṭam kuṟaipāṭu kūṟuka.
   vaṟṟimaṟ ṟāṟṟap pacippiṉum paṇpilārk
   kaṟṟam aṟiya uraiyaṟka - aṟṟam
   maṟaikkun tuṇaiyārk kuraippavē tammait
   tuṟakkun tuṇivilā tār.
   Bear want
   Though sore wasted with hunger, let not men tell out their destitution
   to ungracious churls. Those indeed who lack resolution to deny
   themselves may tell their wants to those who are able and willing to
   save them from destitution.
   79. iṉpamē variṉum iḻiceyal oḻikka.
   iṉpam payantāṅ kiḻivu talaivariṉum
   iṉpattiṉ pakkam iruntaikku —iṉpam
   oḻiyāmai kaṇṭālum ōṅkaruvi nāṭa!
   paḻiyākā āṟē talai.
   Forsake pleasure that brings disgrace. To avoid guilt is the chief
   matter.
   Although shameful things may present themselves. as things that yield
   pleasure, flee from that pleasure's side! Though thou couldst see
   pleasures that cease not soon, — Lord of the land of fountains high! —
   the guiltless way is best.
   80. poyyurai, piṟarkkuk kēṭu ceytal, takavilār iṭattu uṇṇal ceyyat
   takātaṉa.
   tāṉkeṭiṉum takkārkē ṭeṇṇaṟka taṉuṭampiṉ
   ūṉkeṭiṉum uṇṇārkait tuṇṇaṟka — vāṉkavinta
   vaiyakam ellām peṟiṉum uraiyaṟka
   poyyō ṭiṭaimiṭainta col.
   Never desire evil, nor eat with improper persons, nor lie.
   Though ruin seize you plan not ruin to the just! Though body's flesh
   should waste, eat not from hands unfit! Though the whole earth
   o'er-arched by heaven accrue as gain, never speak word with falsehood
   mixed !

   9. piṟarmaṉai nayavāmai / Ch. 9. The Not Desiring Other Men's Wives

   81. ayalār maṉaiviyai aṟiñar virumpār.
   accam peritāl, ataṟkiṉpam ciṟṟaḷavāl
   niccam niṉaiyuṅkāṟ kōkkolaiyāl, —niccalum
   kumpikkē kūrtta viṉaiyāl piṟaṉtāram
   nampaṟka nāṇuṭai yār.
   Against adultery.
   The fear it brings is great ; its pleasure is brief ; each day if it is
   divulged death threatens by the king's decree; and ever it is a deed
   that tends to the pains of hell; O shamefast men, desire not your
   neighbour's wife.
   82. ayal maṉai virumpiṉāl accam pakai paḻi pāvam cērum.
   aṟampukaḻ kēṇmai perumaiin nāṉkum
   piṟaṉ tāram naccuvārc cērā — piṟaṉtāram
   naccuvārc cērum pakaipaḻi pāvameṉ
   ṟaccattō ṭinnāṟ poruḷ.
   The sinner forfeits much, and incurs much.
   Virtue, praise, friendship, greatness, all these four draw not anigh
   the men who covet their neighbour's wife. Hatred, disgrace and guilt,
   with fear, these four possessions abide with men who covet their
   neighbour's wife.
   83. ayalmaṉai viruppam eppōtum accam ām.
   pukka viṭattaccam pōtarum pōtaccam
   tuykku miṭattaccam tōṉṟāmaṟ kāppaccam
   ekkālum accam tarumāl evaṉkolō
   uṭkāṉ piṟaṉil pukal.
   Fear on every side.
   In entering in there's fear; in home returning fear; during enjoyment
   is fear; in guarding the secret is fear; it evermore brings fear: why
   shuns he not with dread the entrance of neighbour's house?
   84. piṟarmaṉai virumpiṉāl peruntuṉpam viḷaiyum.
   kāṇiṉ kuṭippaḻiyām kaiyuṟiṉ kālkuṟaiyum
   āṇiṉmai ceyyuṅkāl accamām — nīḷnirayat
   tuṉpam payakkumāl; tuccāri! nī kaṇṭa
   iṉpam eṉakkeṉaittāl kūṟu.
   The way of transgressors is hard.
   If any one see, disgrace lights on the house; if any hand should seize,
   leg's maimed; in the doing of the shameful deed is dread; it yields as
   fruit vast hell's affliction : tell me, O profligate, what measure of
   delight is thine ?
   85. piṟarmaṉai viḻaintōr pēṭiyāyp piṟappar.
   cemmaiyoṉ ṟiṉṟic ciṟiyā riṉattarāyk
   kommai varimulaiyāḷ tōḷmarīi - ummai
   valiyāṟ piṟarmaṉaimēṟ ceṉṟārē immai
   aliyāki āṭiuṇ pār.
   Punishment of ravishers.
   Those who, in a former state, without any regard to right, becoming
   associates of the mean, enjoyed the embraces of beautiful women, and by
   violence approached their neighbour's wife, in this state will become
   eunuchs, and dancing shall earn their bread.
   86. ayalmaṉai virumpuvatu nallaṟam ārō?
   pallār aṟiyap paṟaiyaṟaintu nāḷkēṭṭuk
   kalyāṇam ceytu kaṭippukka— melliyal
   kātal maṉaiyāḷum illāḷā eṉoruvaṉ
   ētil maṉaiyāḷai nōkku.
   Why should a man who has his own wife look at his neighbour's ?
   While his loving wife dwells in his home, the tender one whom he
   espoused, — seeking (out an auspicious) day, and sounding the drum, for
   many folks to know,—and 'whom he guards as his own, what means a man's
   glance at another's wife?
   87. piṟarmaṉai virumputal pētaiyiṉ ceyalē.
   ampal ayaleṭuppa añcit tamarparīi
   vampalaṉ peṇmarīimaintuṟṟu — nampum
   nilaimaiil neñcattāṉ tuppuravu pāmpiṉ
   talainakki yaṉṉa tuṭaittu.
   Pleasure dearly purchased.
   The enjoyment of the man of unstable heart, who under the influence of
   infatuation approaches his neighbour's wife and sets his affections
   upon her, while neighbours spread abroad his guilt, and kinsmen dread
   and mourn, is like (that of the person who takes pleasure in) licking a
   serpent's head.
   88. aṟiñar kāmam akattuḷ aṭaṅkum.
   paravā veḷippaṭā pallōrkaṇ taṅkā
   uravōrkaṇ kāmanōy ōō koṭitē!
   viravāruḷ nāṇup paṭalañci yātum
   uraiyātuḷ āṟi viṭum.
   The passions of virtuous men are under control.
   The disease of lust in men mighty (in wisdom) gains not ascendancy, is
   not revealed, does not remain fixed on many objects.
   O! it is a cruel conflict; but fearing to incur shame in the midst of
   their foes, they say nothing about it, and it is extinguished within
   them.
   89. akam cuṭum kāmam ataṉāṟ koṭiyatu.
   ampum aḻalum avirkatir ñāyiṟum
   vempic cuṭiṉum puṟamcuṭum — vempik
   kavaṟṟi maṉattaic cuṭutalāṟ kāmam
   avaṟṟiṉum añcap paṭum.
   Lust the most deadly enemy.
   Arrow and fire and sun with glistening rays may rage and burn; but
   these burn the outer man alone. Lust rages and distracts and burns the
   mind, and is more to be feared than they.
   90.tīyiṉum koṭiyatu kāmam eṉṟu eṇṇuka.
   ūruḷ eḻunta urukeḻu centīkku
   nīruḷ kuḷittum uyalākum — nīruḷ
   kuḷippiṉum kāmam cuṭumēkuṉṟēṟi
   oḷippiṉum kāmam cuṭum.
   Fire and lust.
   From the ruddy fire that fiercely rises in the village you may scape by
   bathing in water. — Although you bathe in water, lust will burn; and
   though you climb the hill and hide you there, still lust will burn!
   -----------

                       10. īkai / Ch. 10. Liberality

   91. koṭai mēlulakil iṉpamum koṭukkum.
   illā iṭattum iyainta aḷaviṉāl
   uḷḷa iṭampōl perituvantu — mellak
   koṭaiyoṭu paṭṭa kuṇaṉuṭai māntark
   kaṭaiyāvām āṇṭaik katavu.
   Unchilled by adversity the good do good : heaven's gate is open to
   them.
   Even in their adverse hour, up to the measure of their means, as in the
   prosperous times, with large rejoicing heart to give is their nature
   still. To such good men heaven's gate is never closed.
   92. mūppup piṇivarumuṉ pakuttuṇṇuka.
   muṉṉarē cānāḷ muṉitakka mūppuḷa
   piṉṉarum pīṭaḻikkum nōyuḷa — koṉṉē
   paravaṉmiṉ paṟṟaṉmiṉ pāttuṇmiṉ yātuṅ
   karavaṉmiṉ kaittuṇṭām pōḻtu.
   Death, old age, disease stand round. Give!
   Before (you) are death's day and age detestable ; behind is disease
   that humbles pride. Discursive thoughts indulge not. Cling not to
   earth. Eat, sharing food; hide not your powers while wealth is in your
   hand.
   93. celvattait tuyttalum koṭuttalum ciṟappām.
   naṭukkuṟṟut taṟcērntār tuṉpantuṭaiyār
   koṭuttuttāṉ tuyppiṉum īṇṭuṅkāl īṇṭum
   iṭukkuṟṟup paṟṟiṉum nillātu celvam
   viṭukkum viṉaiyulantak kāl.
   It is useless saving: fate gives and takes away.
   Though dread of want they do not relieve the woes of men who as
   suppliants draw near! Yet although men enjoy and give, wealth grows in
   growing time: cling to it, and yet it flies when former deeds that
   brought wealth have lost their power.
   94. iyalvatu koṭuttalē ēṟṟavāḻ vākum.
   immi aricit tuṇaiyāṉum vaikalum
   nummil iyaiva koṭuttuṇmiṉ — ummaik
   koṭāa tavareṉpar kuṇṭunīr vaiyat
   taṭāa aṭuppi ṉavar.
   Give according to your power.
   Daily having given somewhat, though but the fraction of a grain of
   rice, according to your ability, eat ye (your own food).
   Those who gave not in that world, men say on this earth girt by deep
   waters are those on whose hearth nothing is cooked.
   95. iravāmai koṭaiyiṉum irumaṭaṅku nallatu.
   maṟumaiyum immaiyum nōkki oruvark
   kuṟumā ṟiyaiva koṭuttal — vaṟumaiyāl
   ītal icaiyā teṉiṉum iravāmai
   ītal iraṭṭi yuṟum.
   Do charity for the sake of this world and the future ; and beg not.
   Regarding the other world and this world, give to any suppliant, in
   fitting way, according to your ability. And if on account of poverty
   giving is not possible, yet refraining from begging is twice as
   meritorious as giving.
   96. pakuttuṇṭu vāḻvatē payaṉuṭaiya vāḻvu.
   naṭuvūruḷ vētikai cuṟṟukkōṭ pukka
   paṭupaṉai aṉṉar palarnacca vāḻvār
   kuṭikoḻuttakkak kaṇṇuṅ koṭuttuṇṇāmākkaḷ
   iṭukāṭṭuḷ ēṟṟaip paṉai.
   The fertile and sterile palms.
   Those who live desired of many are as a fertile palm entered in the
   altar's enclosure in midmost of the town. Those who, even when their
   house grows great, give not before they eat, are like the sterile palm
   in the burning ground.
   97. uyarntōr utaviyāl ulakam nilaipeṟum.
   peyaṟpāl maḻaipeyyāk kaṇṇum ulakam
   ceyaṟpāla ceyyā viṭiṉum — kayaṟpulāl
   puṉṉai kaṭiyum porukaṭal taṇcērppa
   eṉṉai ulakuyyum āṟu.
   In troublous time charity must not be omitted.
   Even when the rain rains not in due season, if all the world should
   fail in virtuous actions that ought to be done, —Lord of the warring
   sea's cool shore, where acrid fume of fish in Punnai's perfume dies! -
   how scapes the world?
   98. etir utavi vēṇṭi yītal koṭaiyaṉṟu.
   ēṟṟakai māṟṟāmai eṉṉāṉum tāmvaraiyār
   āṟṟātārk kīvatām āṇkaṭaṉ — āṟṟiṉ
   malikaṭal taṇcērppa māṟivārk kītal
   polikaṭaṉ eṉṉum peyarttu.
   Give to him who cannot recompense thee.
   Denying to no out-stretched hand, to give to needy men as he hath
   power, is duty of a man.—Lord of the swelling sea's cool shore !—A gift
   to those that can return the gift is usury !
   99. illai yeṉṉāmaṟ ciṟitēṉum īka.
   iṟappac ciṟiteṉṉā tilleṉṉā teṉṟum
   aṟappayaṉ yārmāṭṭuñ ceyka — muṟaipputaviṉ
   aiyam pukūun tavaci kaṭiñaipōṟ
   paiya niṟaittu viṭum.
   Give though you have but little. The beggar's dish is filled in time.
   Say not ‘ 'tis passing little,' nor ‘ ' tis nought I give;' on all
   confer thy boon of virtuous charity, Like the dish the mendicant
   presents from door to door, by frequent doles 'twill be filled full.
   100. vaiyaka muḻuvatum vaḷḷalcīr paravum.
   kaṭippiṭu kaṇmuracam kātattōr kēṭpar
   iṭittu muḻaṅkiyatōr yōcaṉaiyōr kēṭpar
   aṭukkiya mūvulakum kēṭkumē cāṉṟōr
   koṭuttā reṉappaṭum col.
   The fame of charitable deeds.
   The sound of beaten drum a katham off they'll hear; the thunder's voice
   through a whole yojanai will reach men's ears; the three successive
   worlds will hear the word that says, ‘Men excellent their gifts have
   given.'
   ------------

                    11. paḻaviṉai / Ch. 11. Old Deeds

   101.muṉceyta viṉai ceytavaṉaiyē tēṭivarum.
   pallāvuḷ uyttu viṭiṉum kuḻakkaṉṟu
   vallatām tāynāṭik kōṭalait — tollaip
   paḻaviṉaiyum aṉṉa takaittētaṟ ceyta
   kiḻavaṉai nāṭik koḷaṟku.
   Deeds come home to the doer.
   Although you send forth the tender calf amid many cows, it has unerring
   skill to seek out its own mother. Deeds of old days have even so the
   power to search him out to whom their fruit pertains.
   102.nalviṉai ceyyātavaṉ vāḻvu payaṉ aṟṟatu.
   uruvum iḷamaiyum oṇporuḷum uṭkum
   oruvaḻi nillāmai kaṇṭum — oruvaḻi
   oṉṟēyum illātāṉ vāḻkkai uṭampiṭṭu
   niṉṟuvīḻn takka tuṭaittu.
   A merely animal life.
   Beauty and youth, and glittering wealth and reverence abide not in one
   stay. To him who, though he sees this, does no single virtuous act in
   this one stage of being, life's joy stands with the body and falls with
   it.
   103. celvattai yāvarum virumpuvar.
   vaḷampaṭa vēṇṭātār yāryāru millai ;
   aḷantaṉa pōkam avaravar āṟṟāl;
   viḷaṅkāy tiraṭṭiṉār illai; kaḷaṅkaṉiyaik
   kāreṉac ceytārum il.
   Wishes are inoperative.
   Who would not see Prosperity? All seek her gifts; but as men's ways
   are, so each man's enjoyments are meted out. Who made the Vilam's apple
   round? Or who gave its dusky hue to the Kalam fruit ?
   104. avaravarkku varum iṉpatuṉpaṅkaḷ akaṟṟamuṭiyā.
   uṟaṟpāla nīkkal uṟuvarkkum ākā
   peṟaṟpā laṉaiyavum aṉṉavām; māri
   vaṟappiṉ taruvārum illai; ataṉaic
   ciṟappiṉ taṇippārum il.
   What must be, must be.
   Not even saints can drive away predestined ills; and all the fated gain
   must needs accrue. In time of drought who can bestow the rain ? Or who
   can check its rich abundance when it falls?
   105. paḻaviṉaip payaṉāṟ periyōrum perumaikeṭṭu vāḻvar.
   tiṉaittuṇaiya rākittam tēcuuḷ aṭakkip
   paṉaittuṇaiyār vaikalum pāṭaḻintu vāḻvar
   niṉaippak kiṭanta tevaṉuṇṭām mēlai
   viṉaippaya ṉallāṟ piṟa.
   Vicissitudes of life are fate.
   Those who lose like stately palms, when their greatness is gone, become
   small asthe millet seed, hiding their glory within, —and so they pass
   their days. This is the fruit of deeds of former days: when you think
   of it, what other cause can there be?
   106.iḷamaiyil aṟiñar iṟappatum viṉaippayaṉ.
   pallāṉṟa kēḷvip payaṉuṇarvār vīyavum
   kallātār vāḻva taṟitirēl — kallātār
   cētaṉa meṉṉumac cēṟkat tiṉmaiyāl
   kōteṉṟu koḷḷātām kūṟṟu.
   Why ignorant men live, while the wise die.
   Those that know the fruit of varied and profound learning die off,
   while the unlearned joyously live on. Would you know the cause ? — The
   unlearned posses within no 'sap of sapience'; — so death deems then
   refuse stalks, and takes them not!
   107. piccaiyeṭuppatum muṟpiṟappiṟ ceyta viṉaippayaṉtāṉ.
   iṭumpaikūr neñcattār ellāruṅ kāṇa
   neṭuṅkaṭai niṉṟuḻalva tellām — aṭampampū
   aṉṉam kiḻikkum alaikaṭal taṇcērppa!
   muṉṉai viṉaiyāy viṭum.
   Why some beg from door to door.
   Lord of the sea's cool shore, where amid the wave swans sport, tearing
   to shreds the Adambu flowers ! When those whose hearts are sore with
   urgent need standbegging, and wander through the long street, in sight
   of all, this is the fruit of former deeds.
   108. ceyta viṉaiyāl aṟiñarum tīviṉai purivar.
   aṟiyārum allar aṟiva taṟintum
   paḻiyōṭu paṭṭavai ceytal — vaḷiyōṭi
   neytal naṟavuyirkkum nīḷkaṭal taṇcērppa!
   ceyta viṉaiyāṉ varum.
   Why even wise men sin.
   They are not ignorant; but, though what man should know they know, yet
   they do deeds that bring guilt to their souls. — Lord of the wide sea's
   pleasant shore, where breezes breathe the lily's fragrance round ! —
   This comes from former deeds.
   109.varuvaṉa vantucērum oruvaṉukku.
   īṇṭunīr vaiyattuḷ ellārum ettuṇaiyum
   vēṇṭārmaṉ tīya ; viḻaipayaṉ nallavai
   vēṇṭiṉum vēṇṭāviṭiṉum uṟaṟpāla
   tīṇṭā viṭutal aritu.
   Desires are unavailing.
   On the earth begirt by gathering waters no men desire in anywise evil
   things, but choice fruit of good things. Yet whether they desire, or
   abhor, it is hard to shun the touch of what fate assigns.
   110.āvaṉa ākum; pōvaṉa pōkum: varuntuvatu payaṉiṉṟu.
   ciṟukā perukā muṟaipiṟaḻntu vārā
   uṟukālat tūṟṟākā āmiṭattē ākum
   ciṟukālaip paṭṭa poṟiyum ataṉāl
   iṟukālat teṉṉai parivu.
   Fate is unalterable. Why grieve?
   The early fates diminish not, nor do they increase, they come not in
   order changedhelp in troublous times is none; what haps will happen,
   there and then; and so, when all things fail, why grieve?
   -----------

                    12. meymmai / Ch. 12. Truth: Reality

   111.iyaṉṟatai vaḻaṅkātiruppatu kuṟṟam.
   icaiyā oruporuḷ ileṉṟāl yārkkum
   vacaiyaṉṟu vaiyat tiyaṟkai — nacaiaḻuṅka
   niṉṟōṭip poyttal niraitoṭīi! ceynnaṉṟi
   koṉṟāriṉ kuṟṟa muṭaittu.
   Broken promises.
   O maid with many armlets graced! To answer 'no' disgraces no man, when
   the boon asked exceeds his means. It is the world's course. But to
   delay and cheat the soul faint with desire is a sin like his who
   'slays' a benefit conferred.
   112.evarum tattam iyaṟkaiyiṉ niṟpar.
   takkārum takkavar allārum tamnīrmai
   ekkālum kuṉṟal ilarāvar —akkāram
   yāvarē tiṉṉiṉum kaiyātām kaikkumām
   tēvarē tiṉṉiṉum vēmpu.
   Natures change not.
   Men of worth, and men unworthy too, retain their natures ever
   unchanged. Whoever they be that eat it, sugar can never grow bitter;
   and margosa is bitter even when eaten by gods.
   113.celvam vantapōtu ellārum cērvar.
   kālāṭu pōḻtil kaḻikiḷaiñar vāṉattu
   mēlāṭu mīṉiṉ palarāvar — elā
   iṭaroruvar uṟṟakkāl īrṅkuṉṟa nāṭa!
   toṭarpuṭaiyēm eṉpār cilar.
   Friends in adverse and prosperous time.
   When a man moves prosperonsly on, devoted kinsfolk are countless as
   shining stars that move in the upper heaven. But when grievous
   affliction haps,—Lord of the dripping hills !—few claim close alliance
   with him.
   114. celvattāl iṉpamum tarumamum eytalām.
   vaṭuvilā vaiyattu maṉṉiya mūṉṟil
   naṭuvaṇa teyta irutalaiyum eytum!
   naṭuvaṇa teytātāṉ eytum ulaippey
   taṭuvatu pōlum tuyar.
   Wealth the essential things. Virtue, wealth, and pleasure.
   Of the three things that endure upon this faultless earth, he who gains
   the midmost gains the two extremes also. He who gains not the midmost
   gains the cruel smart that the turtle feels when put into the pot to
   boil.
   115. celvar vāyccollē cellum eṅkum.
   nalāviṉ kaṉṟāyiṉ nākum vilaipeṟūum
   kallārē āyiṉum celvarvāyccol cellum
   pulīrap pōḻtiṉ uḻavēpōl mītāṭic
   cellāvām nalkūrntār col.
   The words of the rich and of the poor.
   A young heifer fetches a good price when it is the calf of a good cow;
   so the words of rich men though unlearned, pass current. Poor men's
   words, like the plough when moisture is scanty, merely graze the
   surface and are of no avail.
   116. aṟivilār nūlkaṟṟālum aṭaṅkār.
   iṭampaṭa meyññāṉam kaṟpiṉum eṉṟum
   aṭaṅkātār eṉṟum aṭaṅkār — taṭaṅkaṇṇāy
   uppoṭu neypāl tayirkāyam peytaṭiṉum
   kaippaṟā pēyccuraiyiṉ kāy.
   Wisdom cannot benefit the undisciplined.
   O wide-eyed one! though you cook the wild gourd pouring in salt, ghee,
   milk, curds, and spices, it never loses its bitterness. So those who
   never discipline themselves, though they may learn extensive works of
   true wisdom, never become disciplined.
   117. matiyātavarait tāmum matiyātu viṭutalē māṇpu
   tammai ikaḻvārait tāmavariṉ muṉikaḻka
   eṉṉai avaroṭu paṭṭatu? —puṉṉai
   viṟalpūṅ kamaḻkāṉal vīṅkunīrc cērppa!
   uṟaṟpāla yārkkum uṟum.
   Scorn the scorners.
   When men scorn you, before their faces scorn them too ! what has a man
   to do with them? — Lord of shore where beauteous Punnai-flowers perfume
   the glades that surround the swelling tide, — what fated comes to all!
   118. aṟaṅkaḷ yāvum orutaṉmai yuṭaiyaṉa.
   āvē ṟuruviṉa āyiṉum āpayanta
   pālvē ṟuruviṉa allavām — pāl pōl
   orutaṉmait tākum aṟaneṟi āpōl
   uruvu palakoḷal īṅku.
   Cows of many colours, milk always white. Virtue one-many sects.
   Though cows in form are diverse, the milk they yield is not diverse.
   The way of virtue, like that milk, is one in nature, though the schools
   that teach it here are like those cows, of many forms.
   119. ellārum tuṉpamum iṉpamum aṭaivar.
   yāar ulakattōr col illār tēruṅkāl
   yāar upāyattiṉ vāḻātār — yāar
   iṭaiyāka iṉṉāta teytātār yāar
   kaṭaipōkac celvam uyt tār
   Four questions. The common lot.
   Look well! of whom hath not the world found word to say ? And who have
   not by prudence prospered in life's way? Ah! who in life's mid course
   no bitter grief have known ? Ah! who to end of life have kept their
   wealth their own?
   120. uyiruṭaṉ celvatu ceyviṉai yoṉṟē.
   tām ceyviṉaiyallāl tammoṭu celvatumaṟ(ṟu)
   yāṅkaṇum tēriṉ piṟitillai — āṅkuttām
   pōṟṟip puṉainta uṭampum payamiṉṟē
   kūṟṟamkoṇ ṭōṭum poḻutu.
   Nothing accompanies in death but deeds.
   Save a man's deed: nought goes with him, search where you will. The
   body which men cherish so, and adorn, is itself profitless indeed when
   death shall seize and hurry off with it.
   ------

             13. tīviṉaiyaccam / Ch. 13. Dread of Evil Deeds

   121. piṟavuyirkaḷaik koṉṟu pulāluṇṇal perumpāvam.
   tukkattuḷ tūṅkit tuṟaviṉkaṇ cērkalā
   makkaṭ piṇatta cuṭukāṭu — tokka
   vilaṅkiṟkum puḷḷiṟkum kāṭē pulaṉkeṭṭa
   pullaṟi vāḷar vayiṟu.
   Men lead lives of self-indulgence.
   The burning ground is filled with the corpses of men that will not give
   themselves up to a self renouncing life, but oscillate amid sorrows;
   and the maws of perverted foolish men are a mere burning-ground for
   beasts and birds.
   122. paṟavaikaḷaik kūṭṭil aṭaippatu pāvam.
   irumpārkkuṅ kālarāy ētilārk kāḷāyk
   karumpār kaḻaṉiyuṭ cērvar — curumpārkkum
   kāṭṭuḷāy vāḻum civalum kuṟumpūḻum
   kūṭṭuḷāyk koṇṭuvaip pār.
   Penalty for imprisoning birds.
   Their legs in iron bound, as slaves to alien lords they will till the
   black and barren soil, who snared and kept in cages partridges and
   quails, that dwell in wilds where beetles hum amid the flowers.
   123. paḻaviṉaiyāl nāṉ toḻunōyum varum
   akkēpōl aṅkai oḻiya, viralaḻukit
   tukkat toḻunōy eḻupavē — akkāl
   alavaṉaik kātalittuk kālmuṟittut tiṉṟa
   paḻaviṉai vantaṭaintak kāl.
   The penalty incurred by crab-eaters.
   Like fire their palms shall glow, their fingers rotaway, who loved in
   other times on crabs to feed, and broke their joints, what time the
   guilt of ‘olden deeds' comes home, and leprosy's fierce pangs assail.
   124. tīyavarōṭu kūṭiṉ nalla varum tīyavarāvar
   neruppaḻal cērntakkāl neypōl vatūum
   erippaccaṭ ṭevvanōy ākkum — parappak
   koṭuviṉaiya rākuvar kōṭārum kōṭik
   kaṭuviṉaiyar ākiyārc cārntu.
   Bad companions.
   Even things (soft and soothing) like ghee, when joined with the fierce
   heat of fire, will blaze and burn, and cause bitter anguish : so even
   upright men are perverted and give themselves up to deeds of utter
   evil, when they attach themselves to those whose deeds are evil.
   125. periyavar naṭpup piṟaipōl vaḷarum
   periyavar kēṇmai piṟaipōla nāḷum
   varicai varicaiyā nantum — varicaiyāl
   vāṉūr matiyam pōl vaikalum tēyumē
   tāṉē ciṟiyār toṭarpu.
   Friendships with great and mean.
   Great men's intimate regard will daily grow in order due like the
   crescent moon. Mean men's alliance like the full moon that rides the
   sky daily by degrees dwindles away of itself.
   126. naṉṟāka āyntu naṭpukkoḷḷa vēṇṭum.
   cāṉṟōreṉa matittuc cārntāymaṉ cārntāykkuc
   cāṉṟāṇmai cārntārkaṇ illāyiṉ cārntōykēḷ
   cāntakat tuṇṭeṉṟu cepput tiṟantoruvaṉ
   pāmpakattuk kaṇṭa tuṭaittu.
   Disappointment and danger from foolish attachments.
   Thou didst attach thyself (to unworthy persons), saying, they are men
   of absolute integrity! If to thee who hast thus attached thyself,
   integrity in those thine intimates does not appear; hear, O thou who
   hast so attached thyself, it is as if one opened a casket, thinking it
   contained an odorous unguent, and saw a snake within.
   127. makkaḷ maṉamum ceyalum māṟupaṭṭiruppar
   yāar oruvar oruvartam uḷḷattait
   tērum tuṇaimai uṭaiyavar — cāral
   kaṉamaṇi niṉṟimaikkum nāṭa!kēḷ; makkaḷ
   maṉam vēṟu ceykaiyum vēṟu.
   Man cannot fathom other men's minds.
   What single man has power to search and clearly know the inmost self of
   other men? Lord of the land where weighty gems glisten on mountain
   slope, O hear ! — Men's minds are otherwise, and otherwise their deeds.
   128. kaṉḷanaṭpuk karuttiṟku varuttam tarum
   uḷḷattāṉ naḷḷā tuṟutit toḻilarāyk
   kaḷḷattāṉ naṭṭār kaḻikēṇmai — teḷḷip
   puṉaṟcetumpu niṉṟalaikkum pūṅkuṉṟa nāṭa!
   maṉattukkaṇ mācāy viṭum.
   Friends from self-interest
   Lord of the flowery hilly land where streams wash out and carry hither
   and thither (precious things) from the marshy land ! — The effusive
   friendship of those who do not attach themselves (to us) in heart, but
   perform certain friendly acts merely to strengthen their own position,
   and who form friendships guilefully, will issue in disappointment to
   the minds (of those who are intimate with them).
   129. aṟivillār naṭpiṉai añciviṭuttal nallatu
   ōkkiya oḷvāḷtaṉ oṉṉārkaippaṭṭakkāl
   ūkkam aḻippatūum meyyākum — ākkam
   irumaiyum ceṉṟu cuṭutalāl nalla
   karumamē kallārkaṇ tīrvu.
   Ruin from unfitting intimacies.
   If the glittering swords a man brandishes (be allowed to) fall into the
   hands of his foes, it will assuredly come about that he will thus
   destroy also his own power of action. So wealth (bestowed on the
   foolish) will go and burn up (merit accruing in) both worlds, and
   therefore the really good thing is to keep clear of the foolish.
   130. nalviṉaiyē uyirōṭu toṭarntu ceṉṟu naṉmai payakkum
   maṉaippācam kaiviṭāy makkaṭkeṉ ṟēṅki
   eṉaittūḻi vāḻtiyō neñcē — eṉaittum
   ciṟuvaraiyē āyiṉum ceytanaṉ ṟallāl
   uṟupayaṉō illai uyirkku.
   To do good is life's gain.
   O mind! thou leavest not the bonds of home. How many cycles, pray, with
   thou live yearning still for children? Save the good he has done,
   however small its measure may be, there is no true result to any living
   soul.
   aṟattuppāl muṟṟum. End of Part I.
   -----------

                 pakuti 2. poruṭpāl / PART II. ON WEALTH
                         14. kalvi /Ch. 14. Learning

   131. kalvi yaḻakē ciṟanta aḻaku.
   kuñci yaḻakum koṭuntāṉaik kōṭṭaḻakum
   mañcaḷ aḻakum aḻakalla - neñcattu
   nallamyām eṉṉum naṭuvu nilaimaiyāl
   kalvi yaḻakē yaḻaku.
   Learning, the only beauty.
   Beauty of locks, beauty of circling garments' folds, beauty of saffron
   tint: these are not beauty true. Integrity of soul that brings the
   conscience peace is learning's gift: that only is beauty true!
   132. aṟiyāmai nōyai yakaṟṟum maruntu kalvi
   immai payakkumāl īyak kuṟaiviṉṟāl
   tammai viḷakkumāl tāmuḷarāk kēṭiṉṟāl
   emmai yulakattum yāmkāṇēm kalvipōl
   mammar aṟukkum maruntu
   The remedy for bewilderment
   Since in this world it yields fruit; since given it grows not less ;
   since it makes men illustrious; since it perishes not as long as (its
   possessors) themselves exist; in any world we see not any medicine
   that, like learning, removes the delusions of sense.
   133. kalaipala kaṟṟavar talaivar āvār.
   kaḷarnilat tuppiṟanta uppiṉaic cāṉṟōr
   viḷainilattu nelliṉ viḻumitāk koḷvar;
   kaṭainilattō rāyiṉum kaṟṟaṟin tōrait
   talainilattu vaikkap paṭum.
   The learned, though low-born, are first.
   The excellent regard the salt produced in brackish ground as choicer
   than the Nel from fertile soil. It is fitting to place in the first
   rank the learned wise, though (sprung) from the lowest origin.
   134. makkaṭkuk kalviyē nilai peṟṟa celvam.
   vaippuḻik kōṭpāṭā vāyttīyiṟ kēṭillai
   mikka ciṟappiṉ aracar ceṟiṉvavvār
   eccam eṉaoruvaṉ makkaṭkuc ceyvaṉa
   viccaimaṟ ṟalla piṟa.
   Learning, the best legacy.
   It cannot be taken from its place of deposit; it does not perish
   anywhere by fire; if kings of surpassing grandeur are angry they cannot
   take it away; (and therefore) what any man should provide for his
   children as a legacy is learning. Other things are not (real wealth).
   135. uṇmai nūlkaḷaiyē yuṇarntu kaṟkavēṇṭum.
   kalvi karaiyila kaṟpavar nāḷcila
   mella niṉaikkiṉ piṇipala — teḷḷitiṉ
   ārāyn tamaivuṭaiya kaṟpavē nīroḻiyap
   pāluṇ kurukiṉ terintu.
   Discriminating study.
   Learning hath no bounds, the learners' days are few. If you think
   calmly diseases many wait around! With clear discrimination learn what
   is meet for you, like the swan that leaving the water drinks the milk.
   136. tāḻkulam uyarkulam pārātu kaṟṟavaṉai matikkavēṇṭum.
   tōṇi iyakkuvāṉ tollai varuṇattuk
   kāṇiṉ kaṭaippaṭṭāṉ eṉṟikaḻār — kāṇāy
   avaṉtuṇaiyā āṟupōy aṟṟēnūl kaṟṟa
   makaṉ tuṇaiyā nalla koḷal.
   Never mind the boatman's caste if he take you over!
   As none contemn the ferryman, by old caste rule to lowest rank
   assigned, but cross the stream by help he lends; so take thou teachings
   good and wise by help of him who is the learned man.
   137. kaṟṟōruṭaṉ kūṭi uraiyāṭi makiḻvatē pēriṉpam ākum.
   tavalarun tolkēḷvit taṉmai yuṭaiyār
   ikalilar eḵkuṭaiyār tammuḷ kuḻīi
   nakaliṉ iṉitāyiṉ kāṇpām akalvāṉat
   tumpar uṟaivār pati.
   The supreme enjoyment of the society of learned and amiable men.
   We shall see whether any greater bliss is found in the city inhabited
   by the dwellers in the ample heaven than is felt when men of natures
   formed by old imperishable lore, from rivalries exempt keen as tempered
   steel, meet together and laugh.
   138. kaṟṟavar naṭpu vaḷaravaḷara iṉpam tarum.
   kaṉaikaṭal taṇcērppa! kaṟṟaṟintār kēṇmai
   nuṉiyiṉ karumputiṉṟaṟṟē — nuṉinīkkit
   tūriṉtiṉ ṟaṉṉa takaittarō paṇpilā
   īra milāḷar toṭarpu.
   The friendship of the learned ever grows sweeter, that of the unlearned
   ever
   diminishes in sweetness.
   Lord of the cool shore of the resounding sea intimacy with learned
   people is like eating sugar cane from the (tender, juicy) tip;
   association with graceless. sapless men is like leaving the (tender)
   tip and eating it from the (hard, dry) root.
   139. kaṟṟavaraic cārntāṟ kallārum nallaṟivu peṟuvar.
   kallārē yāyiṉum kaṟṟāraic cērntoḻukiṉ
   nallaṟivu nāḷum talaippaṭuvar — tolciṟappiṉ
   oṇṇiṟap pātirippūc cērtalāl puttōṭu
   taṇṇīrkkut tāṉpayan tāṅku.
   The benefits of association with the learned. The pot impregnated with
   odour. Though themselves unlearned, if men live in association with the
   learned they advance daily in excellent knowledge. The new vessel, by
   contact with the Padri-flower of old renown and lustrous hue, imparts
   fragrance to the cold water it contains.
   140. aṟivu nūl kaṟṟāl mayakkam nīkkum.
   alakucāl kaṟpiṉ aṟivunūl kallā
   tulakanūl ōtuva tellām — kalakala
   kūum tuṇaiyallāl koṇṭu taṭumāṟṟam
   pōom tuṇaiyaṟivār il.
   Books of wisdom are the best. Others cannot remove confusion of mind.
   If men leaving works of wisdom, that contain well-weighed instruction,
   unstudied, devote themselves to the recitation of mere worldly
   literature, they will acquire a store of empty high-sounding words, but
   not that wisdom by means of which mental confusion (that treats unreal
   things as real) is removed.
   ------------

                  15. kuṭippiṟappu / Ch. 15. High Birth

   141. uyarkuṭippiṟantār vaṟumaiyilum oḻukkam tavaṟār.
   uṭukkai ulaṟi uṭampaḻintak kaṇṇum
   kuṭippiṟap pāḷartam koḷkaiyiṟ kuṉṟār
   iṭukkaṇ talaivantak kaṇṇum arimā
   koṭippul kaṟikkumō maṟṟu.
   In adversity noble men do not desert their principles.
   Though their clothes may be old and their body worn with want, men of
   noble birth diminish nothing of their due observances. Will the lion
   nibble the creeping grass although sorest need should assail him?
   142. kīḻmakkaḷ celvam vantālum peruntakaimai yaṭaiyār.
   cāṉṟāṇmai cāyal oḻukkam ivaimūṉṟum
   vāṉtōy kuṭippiṟantārk kallatu — vāṉtōyum
   maitavaḻ veṟpa! paṭāa peruñcelvam
   eytiyak kaṇṇum piṟarkku.
   The high-born only have perfect excellence, greatness, and good
   manners.
   Lord of the hills traversed by clouds that touch the heavens! true
   excellence, and dignity, and good conduct, — these three things belong
   to men of race that touches heaven, and not to others, even though they
   may have acquired great wealth.
   143. kuṭippiṟantavarkkē aṭakkam uriyatu.
   irukkai eḻalum etircelavum ēṉai
   viṭuppa oḻitalō ṭiṉṉa — kuṭippiṟantār
   kuṉṟā oḻukkamāk koṇṭār ; kayavarō
   ṭoṉṟā uṇaraṟpāṟ ṟaṉṟu.
   The noble only have an instinctive sense of propriety. Rising from
   their seat (at the approach of worshipful persons), going forth to meet
   them, departing when they dismiss, and such - like things, the well
   born maintain as invariable decorum. The low understand not one of
   these things.
   144. naṟkuṭip piṟappiṉāl naṟpaṇpu cērum.
   nallavai ceyyiṉ iyalpākum tīyavai
   pallavar tūṟṟum paḻiyākum — ellām
   uṇaruṅ kuṭippiṟappiṉ matiyam eṉṉō
   puṇarum oruvark keṉiṉ.
   Noble birth makes duty easy.
   If men (of noble birth) do good things it is natural to them. As to
   evil things (to commit these is impossible to them); for this would be
   guilt which many would bruit abroad. What greater good then can accrue
   to men than high-birth, if it be their lot, to which the perception of
   all (these things) belongs!
   145. tīcceyalkaḷ ceyvataṟku añcuvar naṟkuṭiyiṟ piṟantōr.
   kallāmai accam kayavar toḻilaccam
   collāmai yuḷḷumōr cōrvaccam — ellām
   irappārkkoṉ ṟīyāmai accam marattārim
   māṇāk kuṭippiṟan tār.
   These four pious fears exist only among the really worthy.
   Dread of unlearned ignorance; dread of the work that base men do; dread
   of forgetful slip in words which one must not utter; dread of not
   giving to those that ask: those who are born of a race not so
   distinguished by conscientious fears are as trees.
   146. iṉiyacol , īkai mutaliya naṟkuṇaṅkaḷ kuṭippiṟantōr iṭattirukkum.
   iṉanaṉmai iṉcoloṉ ṟītalmaṟ ṟēṉai
   maṉa naṉmai eṉaṟivai yellām — kaṉamaṇi
   mūttō ṭimaikkum muḻaṅkuvarit taṇcērppa
   iṟpiṟantār kaṇṇē yuḷa.
   The fine qualities of the high-born.
   Lord of the roaring salt-sea's cool shore, where gleam rare gems with
   pearls!Association with the good, pleasant speech, a liberal hand, and
   purity of mind, —all these are only found among the nobly born.
   147. kuṭippiṟantavar tuṉpam vantālum naṟceyalē purivar
   ceykai yaḻintu citalmaṇṭiṟ ṟāyiṉum
   peyyā oruciṟai pēril uṭaittākum;
   evvam uḻantak kaṭaittum kuṭippiṟantār
   ceyvar ceyaṟpā lavai.
   High-born men do their duty always.
   Though its frame-work has perished, and thronging white ants infest it,
   in a spacious mansion some room will still afford shelter from the
   rain. Thus, although want annoys them, the nobly born even yet will do
   what should be done.
   148. kuṭippiṟantār vaṟumaiyilum piṟarkkutavi purivār.
   orupuṭai pāmpu koḷiṉum orupuṭai
   aṅkaṇmā ñālam viḷakkuṟūum — tiṅkaḷpōl
   cellāmai cevvaṉnēr niṟpiṉum oppuraviṟ
   kolkār kuṭippiṟan tār.
   The moon when half in the serpent's mouth still gives light.
   Like the moon which affords light to the fair and spacious earth with
   one side, while the dragon holds the other, the nobly born do not
   become remiss in works of seemly benevolence, though poverty
   (inability) stand fronting them.
   149. kīḻmakkaḷ celvattilum utavi ceyyār.
   cellā iṭattum kuṭippiṟantār ceyvaṉa
   celliṭattum ceyyār ciṟiyavar — pulvāy
   parumam poṟuppiṉum pāypari māpōl
   porumuraṇ āṟṟutal iṉṟu.
   The deer becomes not a charger.
   Men of mean descent, even when all goes well with them, will not
   perform the good deeds that the well-born will do, even when things do
   not go well with them.
   Though the antelope should bear a pillion, it rushes not to war like
   the prancing charger.
   150. tammaiyaṭaintavarait tāṅkuvar kuṭippiṟantōr.
   eṟṟoṉṟum illā viṭattum kuṭippiṟantār
   aṟṟuttaṟ cērntārk kacaiviṭattu ūṟṟāvar
   aṟṟak kaṭaittum akalyā ṟakaḻntakkāl
   teṟṟeṉat teṇṇīr paṭum.
   The noble even in poverty afford aid do those who seek it.
   The nobly born, even when destitute, are props in time of feebleness to
   the needy ones that draw nigh to them. So, when the wide river is dry,
   if you dig in its bed, forth with clear waters gush out.
   -------------

                    16. mēṉmakkaḷ /Ch. 16. Great Men

   151. ciṟu kuṟṟamum mēṉmakkaḷiṭam cērātu.
   aṅkaṇ vicumpiṉ acalnilāp pārikkun
   tiṅkaḷum cāṉṟōrum opparmaṉ — tiṅkaḷ
   maṟuvāṟṟum cāṉṟōr aḵ tāṟṟār terumantu
   tēyvar orumā cuṟiṉ.
   The good cannot endure a stain.
   The moon that diffuses light through heaven's fair realms, and truly
   worthy men are alike: yet that endures a spot, while the truly worthy
   endure it. not; — perplexed and sad they pine away if but one stain
   appear.
   152. arumaiyāṉa ceyalkaḷaiyē mēṉmakkaḷ ceyvar.
   icaiyum eṉiṉum icaiyā teṉiṉum
   vacaitīra eṇṇuvar cāṉṟōr — vicaiyiṉ
   narimā vuḷaṅkiḻitta ampiṉil tītō
   arimāp piḻaippeyta kōl.
   Aim high! Better miss a lion, than hit a jackal
   Whether success attend, or do not attend the work, the excellent will
   even ponder blameless ends.—Is the shaft that missed the lion worse
   than the arrow sent forth, that with its impulse pierced the jackal's
   heart?
   153. mēlōr vaṟumaiyilum ceyyattakkavaṟṟaiyē ceyvār.
   narampeḻuntu nalkūrntā rāyiṉum cāṉṟōr
   kurampeḻuntu kuṟṟaṅkoṇ ṭēṟār — uramkavaṟā
   uḷḷameṉum nāriṉāṟ kaṭṭi uḷavaraiyāl
   ceyvar ceyaṟpā lavai.
   The excellent are not led by want to commit evil.
   The excellent though emaciated and poor, do not transgress the limits
   of virtue and commit evil. With wisdom for the pillar, with
   perseverance as the band, they bind (the mind); and as long as they
   live they do what it behoves them to do.
   154. mēlōrai oru nāṭ kaṇṭālum paḻamai naṇparāvar.
   celvuḻik kaṇorunāḷ kāṇiṉum cāṉṟavar
   tolvaḻik kēṇmaiyiṉ tōṉṟap purintiyāppar
   nalvarai nāṭa! cilanāḷ aṭippaṭiṉ
   kalvaraiyum uṇṭām neṟi.
   The good never forget even a casual acquaintance.
   Lord of the land of goodly hills ! —If trodden for a few days a path is
   formed over even the craggy hill; so excellent persons, though they
   have seen (worthy) men only for one day, as they were travelling, will
   bind them to their soul, exhibiting all the marks of an ancient
   friendship.
   155. kallār uraiyaiyum nallōr kēṭpār.
   pullā eḻuttiṉ poruḷil vaṟuṅkōṭṭi
   kallā oruvaṉ uraippavum, kaṇṇōṭi
   nallār varuntiyuṅ kēṭparē; maṟṟavaṉ
   pallāruḷ nāṇal parintu.
   The good listen with patient courtesy to the orations of the ignorant.
   Even when one speaks who has an ungrammatical knowledge of the letter,
   but not of the meaning who is of a low (empty) school, and is unlearned
   the good with kindly compassion will listen, though it is pain to them,
   being grieved that he should be put to shame in the presence of many.
   156. vaitālum cāṉṟōr vaṭuvurai kūṟār.
   kaṭittuk karumpiṉaik kaṇtakara nūṟi
   iṭittunīr koḷḷiṉum iṉcuvaittē ākum
   vaṭuppaṭa vaituiṟantak kaṇṇum kuṭippiṟantār
   kūṟār tam vāyiṟ citaintu.
   Sugar-cane, crush it as you will, is ever sweet.
   Although you bite the sugar-cane, crush it till its joints are broken,
   grind it, and express its juice, it still will be sweet. The highly
   born, even when men have passed by abusing them so as to wound, never
   lose their self-respect so as to utter from their mouth (words of
   abuse).
   157. mēlōr poy mutaliya pāvaṅkaḷil etuvum ceyyār.
   kaḷḷārkaḷ uṇṇār kaṭiva kaṭintorīi
   eḷḷip piṟarai ikaḻnturaiyār — taḷḷiyum
   vāyiṉpoy kūṟār vaṭuvaṟu kāṭciyār
   cāyiṉ pariva tilar.
   The wise free from gross evils.
   They defraud not, drink not palm-wine, shun what is forbidden, never
   despise and speak contemptuously of their neighbours, nor even
   forgetfully do they utter anything untrue with their mouth : these men
   of faultless vision grieve not though they fall into distress.
   158. piṟarmaṟai kēḷāmai, piṟarmaṉai viḻaiyāmai , puṟaṅkūṟāmai immūṉṟum
   ciṟanta nalloḻukkaṅkaḷ.
   piṟarmaṟai yiṉkaṇ ceviṭāyt tīya
   ētilār ilkaṇ kuruṭaṉāyt tiṟaṉaṟintu
   puṟaṅkūṟṟiṉ mūkaiyāy niṟpāṉēl yātum
   aṟaṅkūṟa vēṇṭā avaṟku.
   When a man should be deaf, blind, and dumb.
   Deaf to others' secrets, blind to his neighbour's wife, dumb to evil
   backbiting—if, knowing what is befitting, a man thus abides, it is not
   necessary to teach him any virtuous precepts.
   159. mēṉ makkaḷiṭattiṟ pala nāṭ ceṉṟālum mutaṉāṭ kaṇṭatupōlavē
   matippār.
   paṉṉāḷum ceṉṟakkāl paṇpilār tam uḻai
   eṉṉāṉum vēṇṭupa eṉṟikaḻpa — eṉṉāṉum
   vēṇṭiṉum naṉṟumaṟ ṟeṉṟu viḻumiyōr
   kāṇṭoṟum ceyvar ciṟappu.
   Seek the good they are always kind.
   They who are destitute of kindly courtesy, even after the lapse of many
   days, will contemn (those that visit them), saying, ‘they will ask
   something of us'. The excellent will treat them with distinction
   whenever they see them, saying, ‘if they ask something of us, it is
   well'.
   160. mēṉmakkaḷaic cārntavar mēṉmai aṭaivār.
   uṭaiyār ivareṉ ṟorutalaiyāp paṟṟik
   kaṭaiyāyar piṉceṉṟu vāḻvar — uṭaiya
   pilamtalaip paṭṭatu pōlātē, nalla
   kulamtalaip paṭṭa iṭattu.
   The treasure cave.
   The lowest sort of men say, there are men of property,’— cling to them
   steadily, follow them, and so flourish. Is it not as when a mine of
   treasure has been found, when men of good lineage have become our
   friends.
   --------------

  17. periyāraip piḻaiyāmai / Ch. 17. Avoidance of Offence to the Great

   161. periyavar veṟuttāl piṉ tiruppa (pērkka) muṭiyātu.
   poṟuppareṉ ṟeṇṇip puraitīrntār māṭṭum
   veṟuppaṉa ceyyāmai vēṇṭum — veṟuttapiṉ
   ārkkum aruvi aṇimalai nalnāṭa!
   pērkkutal yārkkum aritu.
   It is difficult to regain the forfeited favour of good men.
   Lord of the pleasant land whose hills resounding water-falls adorn ! —
   You may not even to faultless men do things that enkindle wrath; for
   when their wrath is once kindled, it is hard for any one to change
   their mood.
   162. aṟivillātavar periyavarai aṭuttiruntālum payaṉpeṟār.
   poṉṉē koṭuttum puṇartaṟ kariyāraik
   koṉṉē talaikkūṭap peṟṟiruntum — aṉṉō
   payaṉil poḻutāk kaḻipparē nalla
   nayamil aṟivi ṉavar.
   Waste of golden opportunities.
   Although those whose (pretended) wisdom is without moral excellence
   have gained access to men to whom approach is difficult even by gifts
   of gold alas! they pass away (the precious moments) as mere waste time.
   163. periyavar matippatuvē matippākum.
   avamatippum āṉṟa matippum iraṇṭum
   mikaimakka ḷāṉmatikkaṟ pāla — nayamuṇarāk
   kaiyaṟiyā mākkaḷ iḻippum eṭuttēttum
   vaiyār vaṭitta nūlār.
   Praise and dispraise of noble persons only of importance.
   Both disesteem and thorough esteem are in the class of things that
   depend on the estimation of the great. Those who have a discriminating
   knowledge of true science, lay no stress on either the abuse or the
   fulsome praise of man who comprehend not moral principles, and know not
   the rules of propriety.
   164. periyavar ciṉantāṟ piḻaippatu aritu.
   virinila nākam viṭaruḷa tēṉum
   urumiṉ kaṭuñciṉam cēṇiṉṟum uṭkum
   arumai uṭaiya araṇcērntum uyyār
   perumai uṭaiyār ceṟiṉ.
   None safe from the wrath of the great.
   The serpent rich of hue, though it dwell in the mountain-cleft, from
   far is frighted by the thunderbolt's fierce wrath; so men escape not
   though hid in strongholds hard to reach, when those great in virtue are
   wroth.
   165. tammait tāmē matittukkoḷvatu matippākātu
   emmai aṟintiliṉ empōlvar illeṉṟu
   tammaittām koḷvatu kōḷaṉṟu — tammai
   ariyarā nōkki araṉaṟiyuñ cāṉṟōr
   periyarāk koḷvatu kōḷ.
   Self-praise is no commendation.
   ‘You know not all our worth, for equals have we none:’ when self thus
   estimates itself, this is not ‘esteem’ ! When perfect men, proficients
   in virtue, regard any as dear, and esteem them as great, this is
   ‘esteem’ !
   166. periyavar kēṇmai nāḷukku nāḷ perukum.
   naḷikaṭal taṇcērppa! nāḷniḻal pōla
   viḷiyum ciṟiyavar kēṇmai — viḷiviṉṟi
   alku niḻalpōl akaṉṟakaṉ ṟōṭumē
   tolpuka ḻāḷar toṭarpu.
   Morning and evening shadows.
   Lord of the great sea’scool margin !—Friendships formed with mean men
   dwindling die like shadows of the morn; friendship of men of old renown
   as shadows of the after-day will lengthen out and grow.
   167. maṉṉar celvamum maṅkaiyar iṉpamum aṭuttavar aṭaivār.
   maṉṉar tiruvum makaḷir eḻilnalamum
   tuṉṉiyār tuyppar takalvēṇṭā — tuṉṉik
   kuḻaikoṇṭu tāḻnta kuḷirmara mellām
   uḻaitaṅkaṭ ceṉṟārk koruṅku.
   To those who cultivate them fruits accrue.
   Those who press their suit, fitness a part, enjoy the wealth of kings,
   and the charms of maidens fair; so all the cool (shady) trees that
   droop earthward with thick foliage, give room to those that thronging
   seek their shelter.
   168. yāriṭattum naṭpuk koḷḷāmai naṉṟu.
   teriyat teriyun terivilār kaṇṇum
   piriyap perumpaṭarnōy ceyyum — periya
   ulavā iruṅkaḻic cērppa!yār māṭṭuṅ
   kalavāmai kōṭi uṟum.
   Friendship brings pangs of severance.
   Severance from even those who have no under standing [lit. no
   understanding that understands (so as) to understand] causes great and
   spreading sorrow. — Lord of the shore of the great, unfailing, swelling
   bay !—To be intimate with none is ten million times the best.
   169. naṟceyal purinta nāṉē payaṉpaṭṭa nāṉ.
   kallātu pōkiya nāḷum periyavarkaṭ
   cellātu vaikiya vaikalum — olva
   koṭāa toḻinta pakalum uraippiṟ
   paṭāavām paṇpuṭaiyār kaṇ.
   No day unimproved.
   Days gone by without learning, those passed without any intercourse
   with the great, those spent without giving what is fitting;— in the
   case of the excellent, if you tell them over, none such occur.
   170. periyōrkkum paṇivu, aṟiñarkku aṭakkam, celvarkkuk koṭai ciṟappait
   tarum.
   periyār perumai ciṟutakaimai oṉṟiṟ
   kuriyār urimai aṭakkam — teriyuṅkāl
   celva muṭaiyārum celvarē taṟcērntār
   allal kaḷaipa veṉiṉ.
   Humility. Self-restraint. Charity.
   The greatness of the great is [the quality of littleness (in their own
   sight), i. e.] humility; the (real) acquisition of those who have
   acquired (any). one (science) is modest self-restraint. If you rightly
   understand things, those possessors of wealth only are really wealthy
   who relieve the wants of those that approach them (as suppliants).
   ----------------

          18. nalliṉañcērtal /Ch. 18. Association with the Good

   171. nallōraic cārntāl tīyakuṇam nīṅkum.
   aṟiyāp paruvat taṭaṅkārō ṭoṉṟi
   neṟiyalla ceytoḻuki yavvum - neṟiyaṟinta
   naṟcārvu cārak keṭumē veyilmuṟukap
   puṟpaṉip paṟṟuviṭ ṭāṅku.
   Good companionship cures the follies of youth.
   In youth unwise, though men consort with haughty ones and walk in
   lawless ways; yet, when they join with those that know the righteous
   path, their faults shall melt away as dew from off the grass when
   sunbeams scorch.
   172. periyār vāyccoṟkēṭṭu aṟaneṟiyaṟintu vāḻka.
   aṟimiṉ aṟaneṟi añcumiṉ kūṟṟam
   poṟumiṉ piṟarkaṭuñcol pōṟṟumiṉ vañcam
   veṟumiṉ viṉaitīyār kēṇmaiyeñ ñāṉṟum
   peṟumiṉ periyārvāyc col.
   Six precepts.
   Know virtue's path ! Dread death! Beat others' words severe! Beware ye
   practise no deceit! Friendship detest with men of evil deeds! Daily get
   gain of words that fall from greatmen's lips!
   173. piṟavit tuṉpattai veṟutta periyavar uṟavukoḷka.
   aṭaintārp pirivum arumpiṇiyum kēṭum
   uṭaṅkuṭampu koṇṭārk kuṟalāl — toṭaṅkip
   piṟappiṉṉā teṉṟuṇarum pēraṟivi ṉārai
   uṟappuṇarka ammāeṉ neñcu .
   Life has many evils. Attach yourself to the wise.
   Severance of close-joined friends and sore disease and death, all these
   combined hap to those that have assumed a human body: so the truly wise
   have felt that birth, from the very first, is bitterness. Ah! soul,
   cleave close to these!
   174. nallōr naṭpu iruntāl piṟappil veṟuppuk koḷḷār.
   iṟappa niṉaiyuṅkāl iṉṉā teṉiṉum
   piṟappiṉai yārum muṉiyār — piṟappiṉum
   paṇpāṟṟu neñcat tavarkaḷō ṭeññāṉṟum
   naṇpāṟṟi naṭkap peṟiṉ.
   Friendship makes life endurable.
   Though when you ponder it, it is surpassing: bitterness, none hate
   (this mortal) birth, if in (this mortal) birth they ever perform
   friendly acts to men whose hearts are set on noble excellence, and gain
   their friendship.
   175. māṭciyuṭaiyāraic cērntōr malaipōl niṟpar.
   ūraṅ kaṇanīr uravunīr cērntakkāl
   pērum piṟitākit tīrttamām — ōruṅ
   kulamāṭci yillārum kuṉṟupōl niṟpar
   nalamāṭci nallāraic cārntu.
   The water from the sewer becomes a sacred stream.
   When water from the town-sewers has joined the great river its very
   name is changed, and it becomes a 'sacred stream’. Ponder well! Even
   those who have no greatness of clan, if they ally themselves with good
   men of goodly fame, shall stand firm as a hill.
   176. periyavaraic cērntōr perumai yaṭaivār.
   oṇkatir vāḷmatiyam cērtalāl ōṅkiya
   aṅkaṇ vicumpiṉ muyalum toḻappaṭūum
   kuṉṟiya cīrmaiyarāyiṉum cīrpeṟuvar
   kuṉṟaṉṉār kēṇmai koḷiṉ.
   The hare in the moon is worshipped.
   Because it is in the bright-beamed moon the very hare in heaven's lofty
   fair expanse is worshipped. Though scant their worthiness, men obtain
   worth who share friendship with those firm as a hill.
   177. perumaiyuṭaiyavaraic cārntāṟ ciṟumai nīṅkum.
   pālō ṭaḷāyanīr pālākum allatu
   nīrāy niṟanterintu tōṉṟātām — tēriṉ
   ciṟiyār ciṟumaiyum tōṉṟātām nalla
   periyār perumaiyaic cārntu.
   Water with milk seems milk.
   Commingled with milk water becomes milk; at least, it shows no more as
   water by its hue. Look close, the mean men's meanness shows not if they
   join themselves to greatness of the good and great.
   178. āṟṟaluṭaiyavaraic cārntōr yāvarkkum añcār.
   kollai yirumpuṉattuk kuṟṟi yaṭaintapul
   olkāvē yākum uḻavar uḻupaṭaikku
   melliyarē yāyiṉum naṟcārvu cārntārmēl
   cellāvām ceṟṟār ciṉam.
   The society of the good a protection.
   Grass close around the stump in the field adjoining the house will not
   be destroyed by the ploughshare of the farmer ; [thus] though men are
   weak, if they get under safe protection, the wrath of their foes will
   not reach them.
   179. tīyavar iṉam cērntāl naṟpaṇpu nīṅkum.
   nilanalattāl nantiya nellēpōl tattam
   kulanalattāl ākuvar cāṉṟōr — kalanalattait
   tīvaḷi ceṉṟu citaittāṅkuc cāṉṟāṇmai
   tīyiṉam cērak keṭum.
   Good tribal associations maintain excellence, and evil ones wreck it.
   As Nel that flourishes through the goodness of the soil, good men
   become illustrious by the excellence of their respective clanships.
   Goodness perishes when it comes near evil associates, as the tornado
   advances and destroys the excellence of the ship.
   180. tīyavarōṭu cērntavarum keṭuvār.
   maṉattāṉ maṟuvila rēṉuntāñ cērnta
   iṉattāl ikaḻap paṭuvar — puṉattu
   veṟikamaḻ cantaṉamum vēṅkaiyum vēmē
   eṟipuṉan tīppaṭṭak kāl.
   Evil association brings ruin.
   Though themselves pure in mind, even good men incur contempt because of
   their associations. So in the woodland glade when a conflagration takes
   place (not the worthless brushWood only, but) the fragrant Sandal and
   Vengai too are consumed.
   --------------

                   19. perumai / Ch. 19. (Moral) Greatness

   181. pērācai nīkkiyavarē perumai yuṭaiyavar.
   īta licaiyā tiḷamaicēṇ nīṅkutalāl
   kāta lavaruṅ karuttallar — kātalit
   tātumnām eṉṉum avāviṉaik kaiviṭṭup
   pōvatē pōlum poruḷ.
   Renunciation of desire is ‘greatness.'
   To give is no longer ours; and youth is gone far off ; our once beloved
   ones think of us no more! To depart, having abandoned 'desire' that
   bids us love and hope for future joys, appears the thing that's meet.
   182. vāḻvu nilaiyeṉak karuti aṟivillār mayaṅkuvār.
   iṟcārviṉ ēmāntēm īṅkamaintēm eṉṟeṇṇip
   poccān toḻukuvar pētaiyār — accārvu
   niṉṟaṉa pōṉṟu nilaiyā eṉavuṇarntār
   eṉṟum pariva tilar.
   Fools make their home in a changing world.
   Fools thinking 'we have found joy in the refuge of home,' and 'we are
   here in perfect repose, forgetful (of the instability of all things),
   go on their way.
   Those who have felt that 'refuge' is unstable, while it seems to stand
   fast, never fix their fond desire (on it).
   183. aṟiñar aṟampurintu vāḻvār
   maṟumaikku vittu mayaliṉṟic ceytu
   ciṟumaip paṭātēnīr vāḻmiṉ — aṟiñarāy
   niṉṟuḻi niṉṟē niṟamvēṟāṅ kāraṇam
   iṉṟip palavum uḷ.
   Seek the unchanging. All things here change.
   See that ye sow seed that in other world may germinate; free your lives
   from earth's bewilder-ment and meanness ; stand in your lot as wise
   men; the changing hue of things shall without cause fade, and many
   things be new.
   184. periyōrpōlac ciṟiyōr aṟam ceyyār.
   uṟaipparuṅ kālattum ūṟṟunīrk kēṇi
   iṟaittuṇiṉum ūrāṟṟum eṉpar koṭaikkaṭaṉuñ
   cāayak kaṇṇum periyārpōṉ maṟṟaiyār
   āayak kaṇṇum aritu.
   Good men are unfailing fountains of beneficence.
   The well of springing water serves the town that draws and drinks, even
   in time when rains are scant; so great men in adverse hour dispense due
   gifts that others give not even in their best estate.
   185. celvam keṭiṉum periyōr aṟañceytē vāḻvār.
   uṟupuṉal tantula kūṭṭi aṟumiṭattum
   kallūṟ ṟuḻiyūṟum āṟēpōṟ - celvam
   palarkkāṟṟik keṭṭulantak kaṇṇuñ cilarkkāṟṟic
   ceyvar ceyaṟpā lavai.
   Great men do not neglect dutiesbecause of poverty.
   The river pours forth a mighty stream and feeds the world; and when it
   is dried up, if men dig in its bed, streams gush out! So good men when
   rich, give to many; and, when ruined, give still at least to some, and
   do what should be done.
   186. ciṟiyōr ceyyun tīmaikaḷ teriyāmal maṟaiyum.
   peruvarai nāṭa periyārkaṇ tīmai
   karunaraimēṟ cūṭēpōl tōṉṟum — karunaraiyaik
   koṉṟaṉṉa iṉṉā ceyiṉum ciṟiyārmēl
   oṉṟāṉum tōṉṟā keṭum.
   Faults are conspicuous in great persons.
   Lord of the lofty hills! Any evil in men of moral greatness shows like
   a brand on a mighty bull; but although mean men do painful deeds, like
   the slaughter of that same mighty bull, none of these attracts
   attention.
   187. periyōr pakaiyiṉum ciṟiyōr naṭpē tīmai viḷaikkum.
   icainta ciṟumai iyalpilā tārkaṭ
   pacainta tuṇaiyum parivām — acainta
   nakaiyēyum vēṇṭāta nallaṟiviṉārkaṭ
   pakaiyēyum pāṭu peṟum.
   Enmity of the wise better than friendship of the mean.
   In proportion to the degree of one's intimacy with men essentially mean
   and without good qualities sorrow accrues; but even the hostility of
   those who do not desire forbidden things even in jest will confer
   dignity.
   188. poyyarukkup poyyākavum meyyarukku meyyākavum naṭappatu naṉṟu.
   melliya nallāruḷ meṉmai atuviṟantu
   oṉṉāruṭ kūṟṟukkum uṭkuṭaimai ellāñ
   calavaruṭ cālac calamē nalavaruḷ
   naṉmai varampāy viṭal.
   Be all things to all men.
   With gentle fair ones use gentleness surpassing theirs; with foes
   display a wrath that death's self might dread; with persistent men show
   a persistency to match ; amongst men of good do good; let the law of
   life be thus laid down.
   189. periyōr puṟaṅkūṟṟaik kēṭpiṉum maṉam vēṟupaṭār.
   kaṭukki oruvaṉ kaṭuṅkuṟaḷai pēci
   mayakki viṭiṉum maṉappirippoṉ ṟiṉṟit
   tuḷakka milātavar tūya maṉattār
   viḷakkiṉuḷ oṇcuṭarē pōṉṟu.
   The great men is unmoved amid insults.
   These are the pure in heart who, though any vex, and with use of
   slanderous words would fain perplex them, with calm unruffled mind
   abide unwavering, like the bright flame within the lamp.
   190. vantavarkku uṇavu koṭuttup piṉ uṇṭu makiḻvār periyōr.
   muṟṟuṟṟun tuṟṟiṉai nāḷum aṟañceytu
   piṟṟuṟṟut tuṟṟuvar cāṉṟavar — attuṟṟu
   mukkuṟṟam nīkki muṭiyum aḷavellām
   tukkattuḷ nīkki viṭum.
   Feeding the hungry.
   The excellent will daily give to the needy in charity their
   first-served food; they themselves will eat what is served after: such
   good conduct removes the three faults, and from sorrow sets men free,
   through all the days, till comes the end.
   ---------------

               20. tāḷāṇmai / Ch. 20. Persevering Energy

   191. muyaṟciyuṭaiyavar mutaṉmaiyāka vāḻvār.
   kōḷāṟṟak koḷḷāk kuḷattiṉkīḻp paiṅkūḻpōl
   kēḷīva tuṇṭu kiḷaikaḷō tuñcupa
   vāḷāṭu kūttiyar kaṇpōl taṭumāṟum
   tāḷāḷark kuṇṭō tavaṟu.
   Active independence.
   As for kindred that feed upon what relatives give them they will die
   off like green grain below a tank, which does not hold a sufficient
   supply (of water).
   Is failure possible to men of energy that are quick in movement as the
   eyes of those who perform the sword-dance ?
   192. tāḻvilā muyaṟci talaivaṉākac ceyyum.
   āṭukō ṭāki atariṭai niṉṟatūum
   kāḻ koṇṭa kaṇṇē kaḷiṟaṇaikkuṅ kantākum;
   vāḻtalum aṉṉa takaittē oruvaṉṟāṉ
   tāḻaviṉṟit taṉṉaic ceyiṉ.
   By energy a man makes himself.
   What once stood by the wayside, a twig that bent to every touch, when
   its core is developed within, may become a stake to which they tie an
   elephant. Life too is thus, if man himself, unfailing make himself !
   193. muyaṟciyuṭaivaṉukkuc ciṟutoḻilum peruntoḻilām.
   uṟupuli ūṉirai iṉṟi orunāḷ
   ciṟutērai paṟṟiyum tiṉṉum — aṟiviṉāl
   kāltoḻil eṉṟu karutaṟka kaiyiṉāl
   mēltoḻilum āṅkē mikum.
   Stoop to conquer.
   The huge tiger, when lacking flesh for food one day, may even seize a
   little frog and eat it. Think not 'By (all my) knowledge I only gain
   menial tasks;" to the skillful hand nobler employments shall even there
   abound.
   194. cōrvu iṉṟit toḻil purivatutāṉ āṇmai.
   icaiyā teṉiṉum iyaṟṟiyōr āṟṟāl
   acaiyātu niṟpatām āṇmai — icaiyuṅkāl
   kaṇṭal tiraiyalaikkum kāṉalam taṇcērppa
   peṇṭirum vāḻārō maṟṟu.
   Manliness is perseverance in spite of failure.
   Manliness is working on, in no wise faltering, remaining stedfast
   though the matter succeed not. When all is successful,— Lord of the
   cool lovely shore, in whose groves the waves agitate the scented thorn,
   — will not even women live and flourish?
   195 kalvi, celvam, tavam, muyaṟci ivaiyiruntāl uyarkulam ākum.
   nalla kulameṉṟum tīya kulameṉṟum
   collaḷa vallāl poruḷillai — tolciṟappiṉ
   oṇporuḷ oṉṟō tavamkalvi āḷviṉai
   eṉṟivaṟṟāṉ ākuṅ kulam.
   What is good or bad caste ?
   When men speak of 'good caste' and 'bad caste' it is a mere form of
   speech, and has no real meaning. Not even by possessions, made splendid
   by ancient glories, but by self-denial, learning, and energy is Caste
   determined.
   196. muyaṟciyai muṭiviṟkāṭṭuvōrē mutaṉmaiyuṭaiyavar.
   āṟṟun tuṇaiyum aṟiviṉai uḷḷaṭakki
   ūkkam uraiyār uṇarvuṭaiyār — ūkkam
   uṟuppiṉāl ārāyum oṇmai yuṭaiyār
   kuṟippiṉkīḻp paṭṭa tulaku.
   Reserve as to your own plans, and skill in detecting those of others.
   Till the time for action comes men of understanding keep close within
   themselves their wisdom and speak not of their designs (ūkkam = What
   they are labouring to effect).
   The world is subject to the nod of the brilliant (diplomatists) who
   search out (and know) men's designs from outward indications (lit.
   from) their members, i.e. from eye, gesture, tone, expression etc.).
   197. tantai taḷarntāl maintaṉ tāṅkavēṇṭum.
   citalai tiṉappaṭṭa āla marattai
   matalaiyāy maṟṟataṉ vīrūṉṟi yāṅkuk
   kutalaimai tantaikaṇ tōṉṟiltāṉ peṟṟa
   putalvaṉ maṟaippak keṭum.
   The worthy son conceals his sire's defects, and sustains his weakness.
   If the banyan's trunk be eaten by the gnawing ant, its 'branch root'
   bears it up, like a buttress; even so, when decay appears in the sire,
   the son he has begotten shall hide it, and weakness is no more.
   198. aḻikkattakka ceyalaip paṇpuṭaiyōr ceyyār.
   īṉamāy illirun tiṉṟi viḷiyiṉum
   māṉan talaivaruva ceypavō — yāṉai
   varimukam puṇpaṭukkum vaḷḷukir nōṉṟāḷ
   arimā matukai yavar.
   Poverty but not dishonour.
   The lion's pointed claw and mighty foot will wound the spotted face of
   an elephant; those who have power like his , — though bereft of all,
   they die in want within their home, — will they do deeds that bring
   disgrace?
   199. pērāṇmai iṉṟeṉiṟ piṟappāṟ payaṉillai.
   tīṅkarum pīṉṟa tiraḷkāl uḷaiyalari
   tēṅkamaḻ nāṟṟam iḻantāraṅku — ōṅkum
   uyarkuṭi yuṭpiṟappi ṉeṉṉām peyarpoṟikkum
   pērāṇmai yillāk kaṭai.
   High birth useless without lofty energies.
   Like the flowers on a rounded stalk, with hair like filaments that
   sweet cane bare, when the sweet fragrance they breathed is lost, what
   gain accrues from birth in a lofty noble house when energy that makes
   the name noteworthy, is wanting?
   200. uḻaippāṟ kiṭaitta uṇavē uyarntatu.
   perumut taraiyar perituvan tīyuṅ
   karuṉaiccō ṟārvar kayavar — karuṉaiyaip
   pērum aṟiyār naṉivirumpu tāḷāṇmai
   nīrum amiḻtāy viṭum.
   The scant fare of the laborious is the diet of the gods.
   The base feed full of rice and savoury food, that men, great lords of
   the triple lands, with generous gladness give; but water won with
   willing strenuous toil by those who know, not savoury food by name
   even, will turn to nectar.
   -------------

           21. cuṟṟantaḻāl / Ch. 21. The Support of Kindred

   201. cuṟṟattāraik kaṇṭāl tuṉpam nīṅkum.
   vayāvum varuttamum īṉṟakkāl nōvum
   kavāaṉ makaṟkaṇṭu tāymaṟan tāaṅku
   acāattāṉ uṟṟa varuttam ucāattaṉ
   kēḷiraik kāṇak keṭum.
   Comfort from sympathy of kinsmen.
   As a mother when she sees her son upon her lap forgets the languors,
   the pains, and the throes of birth; so trouble arising from weakness
   will die when a man sees his sympathizing kinsmen around him.
   202. pallār payaṉpeṟa nallāṇmakaṉ vāḻvāṉ.
   aḻalmaṇṭu pōḻtiṉ aṭaintavarkaṭ kellām
   niḻalmarampōl nēroppat tāṅkip — paḻumarampōl
   pallār payaṉtuyppat tāṉvarunti vāḻvatē
   nallāṇ makaṟkuk kaṭaṉ.
   Good friends like trees that afford both shade and fruit.
   To yield ready protection alike to all, as a tree affords shade to
   those that seek its shelter when the heat grows fierce; and to live
   toiling so that many may enjoy the gain, resembling thus a fruit
   producing tree, is the duty of the manly man.
   203. taṟcērntavarait tāṅkuvar periyōr.
   aṭukkal malaināṭa taṟcērn tavarai
   eṭukkalām eṉṟār periyōr — aṭuttaṭuttu
   vaṉkāy palapala kāyppiṉum illaiyē
   taṉkāy poṟukkalāk kompu.
   The magnanimous never refuse to support their kindred. The bough
   sustains all its fruits.
   Lord of the land where mountains piled on mountains rise! the great
   demur not to support their kith and kin ;—there is no bough but will
   support the fruit it bears, though clustered thick great fruits and
   many cling thereon.
   204. ciṟṟiṉattār kēṇmai cilanāḷ niṟkum.
   ulakaṟiyat tīrak kalappiṉum nillā
   cilapakalāñ ciṟṟiṉattār kēṇmai — nilaitiriyā
   niṟkum periyōr neṟiyaṭaiya niṉṟaṉaittāl
   oṟka milāḷar toṭarpu.
   The friendship of the great alone is lasting.
   Though mingled in a complete intimacy so that all the world knows of
   it, the friendship of the little will last but little time. Connection
   with the firm unyielding men endures till the great one's path, who
   never swerve, is reached.
   205. palartuyar tīrppavar talaivar āvār.
   iṉṉar iṉaiyar emarpiṟar eṉṉuñcol
   eṉṉum ilarām iyalpiṉāl — tuṉṉit
   tolaimakkaḷ tuṉpan tīrp pārēyār māṭṭum
   talaimakka ḷākaṟpā lār.
   Universal benevolence.
   ‘Such are they and so many;’ ‘these are ours; those strange :’ those
   worthy to be classed as chief of men say nothing like this ; so to
   speak is not their nature ; for they relieve the distress of ALL that
   troubled come to them!
   206. āruyir naṇpartarum kūḻum amutamām.
   poṟkalattup peyta puliyukir vāṉpuḻukkal
   akkāram pālō ṭamarārkait tuṇṭaliṉ
   uppilip puṟkai uyirpōṟ kiḷaiñarmāṭṭu
   ekkālat tāṉum iṉitu.
   Hard fare with kindred, better than a feast without love.
   More sweet than rice, though white as tiger's claw with milk and sugar
   served on plate of gold, by loveless hands, is any tasteless mess, in
   any dish, when shared with kindred dear as life.
   207. pakaivar maṉaiyiṟ pāṟcōṟum vēmpām.
   nāḷvāyp peṟiṉuntan naḷḷātōr illattu
   vēḷāṇmai veṅkaruṉai vēmpākum — kēḷāy
   aparāṇap pōḻtiṉ aṭakiṭuva rēṉun
   tamarāyār māṭṭē iṉitu.
   Any food with foes bitter, with friends sweet.
   Most bitter (Margosa) is the bounteous meal of dainty food at early
   dawn in house of those who love us not. Hear thou! though not till
   evening given, the mess of herbs when eaten with our own is sweet.
   208. uṟṟaviṭat tutavuvōr naṭṭava reṉpār.
   muṭṭikai pōla muṉiyātu vaikalum
   koṭṭiyuṇ pāruṅ kuṟaṭupōṟ kaiviṭuvar
   cuṭṭukkōl pōla eriyum pukuvarē
   naṭṭā reṉappaṭu vār.
   Interested and disinterested friends.
   Even those who, like the artificer's small hammer (with slight strokes
   fashioning the jewel), gently (muṉiyātu), day by day, moulding their
   patron to their will, eat his food, will drop him (when poverty assails
   him), as the pincers do the gold put into the crucible. Those worthy to
   be called friends are like the artificer's rod which enters the fire
   with it.
   209. iṭar makiḻ vāruṅkē eytuvar naṇpar.
   naṟumalart taṇkōtāy! naṭṭārkku naṭṭār
   maṟumaiyuñ ceyvatoṉ ṟuṇṭō — iṟumaḷavum
   iṉpuṟuva iṉpuṟ ṟeḻīi avarōṭu
   tuṉpuṟuva tuṉpuṟāk kāl.
   Sympathy in sorrow and in joy.
   O maid adorned with fresh garlands of fragrant flowers! is there one
   thing that even in other world, friends may perform for friends, if
   till they die, their joys they share, but shun to share their griefs ?
   210. viruppamillār maṉaip porikkaṟiyuṇavum vēmpākum.
   viruppilā rillattu vēṟirun tuṇṇum
   verukkukkaṇ veṅkaruṉai vēmpām — viruppuṭait
   taṉpōlvā rilluḷa tayaṅkunīrt taṇpuṟkai
   eṉpō ṭiyainta amiḻtu.
   Better fast with friends than feast with foes.
   The savoury fried curry, (in colour) like a cat's eye, which one eats
   seated a part in the house of those who are without affection, will be
   bitter as margosa; but cold gruel (weak and insipid), like clear water,
   in the house of affectionate equals, is ambrosia that cleaves to the
   bones.
   --------------

         22. naṭpārāytal/Ch. 22. Scrutiny in Forming Friendships

   211. nāḷukku nāḷ uyarum nallōr naṭpu.
   karuttuṇarntu kaṟṟaṟintār kēṇmaiyeñ ñāṉṟum
   kuruttiṟ karumputiṉ ṟaṟṟē — kuruttiṟku
   etircelattiṉ ṟaṉṉa takaittarō eṉṟum
   matura milāḷar toṭarpu.
   Satisfying friendships.
   Intimacy with those who understand the real intention (of one's words),
   and who have acquired wisdom by learning, will at all times be like
   eating sweet cane from the tender shoots; but attachment to those who
   have no sweetness of disposition is like eating it in a direction
   opposite to the tender shoot (it grows harder and less sweet).
   212. kuṭip piṟappaṟintē naṭpuk koḷka.
   iṟpiṟap peṇṇi iṭaitiriyār eṉpatōr
   naṟpuṭai koṇṭamai yallatu — poṟkēḻ
   puṉaloḻukap puḷḷiriyum pūṅkuṉṟa nāṭa!
   maṉamaṟiyap paṭṭatoṉ ṟaṉṟu.
   Examine the lineage of a candidate for your friendship.
   Lord of the land of flowery hills, where wild-fowl golden in hue fly,
   scared by the rush of the waterfall.
   Regarding the mobility of their birth—these will not swerve:—To say
   thus is a good ground of confidence—(a good position to take up); but
   to say ‘their minds are known,' is not any (i. e. real ground).
   213. nāy pōṉṟavarē naṭpiṟ ciṟantavar.
   yāṉai aṉaiyavar naṇporīi nāyaṉaiyār
   kēṇmai keḻīik koḷalvēṇṭum — yāṉai
   aṟintaṟintum pākaṉaiyē kollum eṟintavēl
   meyyatā vālkuḻaikkum nāy.
   The elephant and the dog, types of false and true friends.
   Forsaking friendship with those who resemble the elephant, embrace and
   hold fast intimacy with those who are like the dog; for the elephant
   will slay even its keeper though it has long known him ; but the dog
   will wag its tail when it has in its body the javelin (hurled at it by
   its angry master).
   214. uḷḷaṅ kalantavar urimai naṇpuṭaiyavar.
   palanāḷum pakkattā rāyiṉum neñciṟ
   cilanāḷum oṭṭārō ṭoṭṭār — palanāḷum
   nīttā reṉakkai viṭaluṇṭō tanneñcattu
   yāttārō ṭiyātta toṭarpu.
   Friends are not to be forsaken because long severed
   Though men dwell side by side for many days when their souls cleave not
   (are not congenial) for even a few days they retain not their
   friendship. But is it possible to let go attachment's well-knit ties,
   though those to whom one's soul is knit dwell many days afar?
   215. curuṅkā tirukkum ciṟantavar naṭpu.
   kōṭṭuppūp pōl malarntupiṉ kūmpātu
   vēṭṭatē vēṭṭatām naṭpāṭci — tōṭṭa
   kayappūppōl muṉmalarntu piṉkūmpu vārai
   nayappārum naṭpārum il.
   Tree-flowers and water-flowers.
   The use and wont of friendship is that, what once it has loved it loves
   always,— like the flower on the tree-branch which having once unfolded
   afterwards closes not; but who will esteem, or make friends of those
   who are like flowers on the surface of the excavated tank, which unfold
   and afterwards close themselves?
   216. kamuku teṉṉai paṉai pōṉṟatu kaṭaiyiṭai mutal naṭpu.
   kaṭaiyāyār naṭpiṟ kamukaṉaiyar ēṉai
   iṭaiyāyār teṅkiṉ aṉaiyar — talaiyāyār
   eṇṇarum peṇṇaipōṉ ṟiṭṭañāṉ ṟiṭṭatē
   toṉmai uṭaiyār toṭarpu.
   Three grades of friends.
   The lowest sort of men in friendship are like the Arecanut tree. The
   middle sort are like the cocoa-nut tree. Attachments to the chief of
   men — who are old friends —is like the Palmyra tree of rare worth :
   what was given that first day was given once for all.
   217. aṉpilār tanta amutum eṭṭikkāy.
   kaḻunīruṭ kāraṭa kēṉum oruvaṉ
   viḻumitāk koḷḷiṉ amiḻtam — viḻumiya
   kuyttuvaiyār veṇcōṟē yāyiṉum mēvātār
   kaittuṇṭal kāñciraṅ kāy.
   A dinner of herbs with affection is ambrosia. The greatest delicacies
   without it, nux vomica.
   If one receive you courteously, though what he gives is but rank herbs
   dressed in water in which rice had been washed, it is ambrosia. To eat
   from the hands of those who love us not, though it be white rice with
   rich spicy condiments, is nux vomica.
   218. vāykkāl pōṉṟavar naṭpai maruvuka.
   nāykkāṟ ciṟuviralpōl naṉkaṇiya rāyiṉum
   īkkāl tuṇaiyum utavātār naṭpeṉṉām ?
   cēyttāṉum ceṉṟu koḷalvēṇṭum ceyviḷaikkum
   vāykkālaṉaiyār toṭarpu.
   Friendship of those who though near aid not.
   Of what value is the friendship of those who being very near like the
   little claw on a dog's leg, afford not help as much as a fly's foot?
   Though you go far to seek it, lay hold of the friendship of those who
   are like the water channel that causes the crops in the field to
   flourish.
   219. teḷivilār naṭpukkoḷvatu tītē.
   teḷivilār naṭpiṟ pakainaṉṟu cātal
   viḷiyā arunōyiṉ naṉṟāl — aḷiya
   ikaḻtaliṉ kōṟal iṉitēmaṟ ṟilla
   pukaḻtaliṉ vaitalē naṉṟu.
   Four bad things.
   Better hate than friendship of the ignorant. Better death than disease
   which comes on yielding to no remedy. Sweeter is killing thin contempt
   that breaks the spirit. Better abuse than undeserved praise.
   220. takkavar naṭpiṉai āyntu cārntiru.
   marīip palarōṭu paṉṉāḷ muyaṅkip
   porīip poruṭṭakkārk kōṭalē vēṇṭum ;
   parīi uyircekukkum pāmpoṭum iṉṉā
   marīiip piṉṉaip pirivu.
   Never forsake a friend !
   When men have formed an intimacy (marīi) separation afterwards even
   from a snake which slays with its tooth (parīi), causes affliction
   (iṉṉā) therefore associate intimately with many, and for many days take
   them to your bosom, conform to their tastes and habits (porīi ), and
   hold fast the really worthy ones.
   -----------

    23. naṭpiṟ piḻai poṟuttal / Ch. 23. Bearing and Forbearing in
                                 Friendship

   221. naṭpiṉar piḻaiyai nallōr poṟuppar.
   nallār eṉattām naṉivirumpik koṇṭārai
   allār eṉiṉum aṭakkik koḷalvēṇṭum;
   nelluk kumiyuṇṭu nīrkku nuraiyuṇṭu
   pullitaḻ pūviṟku muṇṭu.
   Bear with infirmities. None are perfect.
   When those to whom with strong desire we clung as good, prove
   otherwise, keep the sad secret bid, - cling to them still! The growing
   grain has husks; the water has its foam: flowers too have scentless
   outer sheath of leaves.
   222. veṟuppaṉa ceyyiṉum poṟuppar periyōr.
   ceṟuttō ṟuṭaippiṉuñ cempuṉalō ṭūṭār
   maṟuttuñ ciṟaiceyvar nīrnacaii vāḻnar
   veṟuppa veṟuppac ceyiṉum poṟupparē
   tāmvēṇṭik koṇṭār toṭarpu.
   Bear with your friends' faults, as the cultivator bears with the stream
   that often bursts its enclosure.
   If though they dam it up, the fresh flood should burst its bonds, men
   do not feel aggrieved; but straightway imprison it again, for by the
   precious stream they live: so though their friends again and again do
   very disagreeable things, men bear with those whose friendship is dear.
   223. oruvar poṟumaiyē iruvar naṭpu ākum.
   iṟappavē tīya ceyiṉuntam naṭṭār
   poṟuttal takuvatoṉ ṟaṉṟō — niṟakkōṅku
   uruvavaṇ ṭārkkum uyarvarai nāṭa!
   oruvar poṟaiyiruvar naṭpu.
   Bear all things!
   Lord of the lofty hilly land, where the bees hum through all the
   flowery Gongu-glade ! — Though friends should work us surpassing ills,
   the only thing that is meet is forbearance: patience of one is
   friendship of the twain.
   224. naṭpiṉar pirivē uṭcuṭum tīyām.
   maṭitirai tantiṭṭa vāṉkatir muttam
   kaṭuvicai nāvāy karaiyalaikkuñ cērppa!
   viṭutaṟ kariyār iyalpilarēl neñcam
   cuṭutaṟku mūṭṭiya tī.
   To be wroth with those we love, is like fire in the breast!
   Lord of the shore where pearls of purest lustre are thrown up by
   circling waves, and where swift darting boats are borne through the
   surf !—when friends who we may not leave have alien hearts, it is as a
   scorching fire enkindled in the soul.
   225. naṉmai naṭpiṉaraip poṉṉeṉap pōṟṟuka.
   iṉṉā ceyiṉum viṭaṟpāla rallāraip
   poṉṉākap pōṟṟik koḷalvēṇṭum — poṉṉoṭu
   nalliṟ citaittatī nāṭoṟum nāṭittam
   illattil ākkuta lāl.
   Forsake not friends though they wrong you.
   Though those, from whom you may not part, do grievous things, O maid
   who art as Lakshmi! you must still cherish your chosen friends—fire
   destroys men's wealth and happy homes, yet is it sought there and
   kindled every day.
   226. tuṉpañ ceyyiṉum naṇparait taḻuvuka.
   iṉṉā ceyiṉum viṭutaṟ kariyārait
   tuṉṉāt tuṟattal takuvatō — tuṉṉaruñcīr
   viṇkuttu nīḷvarai veṟpa! kaḷaipavō
   kaṇkuttiṟ ṟeṉṟutaṅ kai.
   Friends are not to be forsaken on account of their faults.
   When those from whom it is hard to part do evil things should men at
   once renounce them?—Lord of the lengthening hills that pierce the sky,
   whence rarest giftsdescend !—Do men cut off their hand because it
   pricked their eye?
   227. naṭṭapiṉ tīmai nāṭutal naṉṟala.
   ilaṅkunīrt taṇcērppa! iṉṉā ceyiṉum
   kalantu paḻikāṇār cāṉṟōr — kalantapiṉ
   tīmai yeṭutturaikkun tiṇṇaṟivillātār
   tāmum avariṟ kaṭai.
   Those who forsake friends that have committed a fault are worse than
   they.
   Lord of the cool shore of the shining sea! The perfect ones when they
   have contracted an intimacy with any, see no faults in them, even if
   they do things that cause pain. Those who, being without stable wisdom,
   take up and tell out men's evil deeds after contracting an intimacy
   with them, are themselves worse than they.
   228. naṇparkaḷ ceyalellām āyntāl naṉmaiyām.
   ētilār ceyta tiṟappavē tīteṉiṉum
   nōtakka teṉṉuṇṭām nōkkuṅkāl — kātal
   kaḻumiyār ceyta kaṟaṅkaruvi nāṭa!
   viḻumitām neñcattuḷ niṉṟu.
   Faults in strangers and in friends
   Lord of the land of resounding waterfalls ! Though what those alien to
   us have done may be surpassingly evil, what is there to be pained at,
   when you regard it?
   Things done by affectionate friends, will be excellent when so regarded
   by the mind.
   229. vēṟṟumai naṇpaiyum tūṟṟātu aṭakkuka.
   tamareṉṟu tāṅkoḷḷap paṭṭavar tammait
   tamaraṉmai tāmaṟintā rāyiṉ avarait
   tamariṉum naṉku matittut tamaraṉmai
   tammuḷ aṭakkik koḷal.
   If friends prove unfaithful, love them the more, and keep the secret of
   their unfaithfulness in your own bosom.
   If we perceive those we have accepted as our own to be not really ours,
   we must pay even more respect to them than to our own, and keep
   concealed in our own mind the fact that they are not really ours.
   230. naṭpiṭaik kuṟṟam nāṭutal tītu.
   kuṟṟamum ēṉaik kuṇamum oruvaṉai
   naṭṭapiṉ nāṭit tirivēṉēl — naṭṭāṉ
   maṟaikāvā viṭṭavaṉ celvuḻic celka
   aṟaikaṭalcūḻ vaiyam naka.
   He who pries into his friends faults shares the punishment of the
   revealer of secrets. If, after I have taken a man for my friend, I go
   about prying into his faults and virtues (other qualities), may I
   departwhither that man goes who has not kept his friend's secret, while
   the earth, begirt by the resounding sea, laughs.
   --------------

              24. kūṭā naṭpu / Ch. 24. Unreal Friendship

   231. karumam muṟṟuntuṇai kayavarnaṭpu niṟkum.
   ceṟippil paḻaṅkūrai cēṟaṇai yāka
   iṟaittunīr ēṟṟuṅ kiṭappar —kaṟaikkuṉṟam
   poṅkaruvi tāḻum puṉalvarai naṉṉāṭa!
   taṅkarum muṟṟun tuṇai.
   Unreal friends cling to you till they have gained their desire.
   Lord of the pleasant well-watered mountain land, where boiling
   waterfalls pour down from the dark hills! (Poor men) linger beneath the
   old roof that affords no shelter, baling out the water, and making mud
   embankments, and enduring the down-pour; (even so unreal friends stick
   by you) till their purpose has been attained.
   232. māri peyyāmaiām cīrilār naṭpu.
   cīriyār kēṇmai ciṟanta ciṟappiṟṟāy
   māripōl māṇṭa payattatām — māri
   vaṟantakkāl pōlumē vālaruvi nāṭa!
   ciṟantakkāṟ cīrilār naṭpu.
   The friendship of the excellent like rain ; of others like drought.
   Lord of the land of pure (white, forming) waterfalls! The friendship of
   the virtuous is of exceeding excellence, and yields glorious results —
   like (seasonable) rain; but the friendship of the vicious, even in the
   time of its exuberance, is as when the rain fails in the time of
   drought.
   233. uṇarvilā naṭpu nirayattai ottatē.
   nuṇṇuṇarvi ṉāroṭu kūṭi nukarvuṭaimai
   viṇṇulakē yokkum viḻaiviṟṟām — nuṇṇūl
   uṇarvila rākiya ūtiya millārp
   puṇartal nirayattuḷ oṉṟu.
   Bliss enjoyed with the wise is heaven; association with the ignorant
   and worthless is hell.
   Enjoyment of the society of men of refinement resembles the heavenly
   world in the pleasure it affords. Closest contact with those destitute
   of fine perception of the value of learned pursuits —men who gain no
   wisdom from you, nor you from them—is one of the hells.
   234. kūṭānaṭpup perukip piṉ kuṟaiyum.
   perukuvatu pōlat tōṉṟivait tīppōl
   orupoḻutuñ cellātē nantum — arukellāñ
   cantaṉa nīḷcōlaic cāral malaināṭa!
   pantamilāḷar toṭarpu.
   Intimacy with those who have no sympathy is like fire in the stubble.
   Lord of the land where wide groves of Sandal cover the hilly slopes!
   Friendship with those who feel not its real obligation, like fire in
   the straw (suddenly) appears, seeming as though it would increase, but
   never advancing dies out.
   235. kūṭā naṭput tuṉpamē koṭukkum.
   ceyyāta ceytumnām eṉṟālum ceytavaṉaic
   ceyyātu tāḻttukkoṇ ṭōṭṭalum — meyyāka
   iṉpuṟūum peṟṟi ikaḻntārkkum annilaiyē
   tuṉpuṟūum peṟṟi tarum.
   Boastings and delays.
   The promising to do what cannot be done, and the putting off and
   leaving undone through delay things that could be done, will forthwith
   bring experience of sorrow even to those who have condemned truthfully
   the pleasant experiences of life (ascetics and saints).
   236. ciṟiyavarai aṟiyalām ceyalvēṟupāṭṭiṉāl.
   orunīrp piṟantōruṅku nīṇṭak kaṭaittum
   virinīrk kuvaḷaiyai āmpalok kallā ;
   perunīrār kēṇmai koḷiṉunī rallār
   karumaṅkaḷ vēṟu paṭum.
   The water-lily does not become a lotus by being in the same tank with
   it: so evil persons will act in conformity with their natures.
   The Ambal (water-lily) does not equalthe expanding Kuvalai though born
   and growing together with it in the same pool : though they attain to
   intimacy with those of generous instincts, the deeds of men in whom
   these instincts are lacking will be diverse.
   237. oṟṟumaiyillār naṭpu iṉṉātu.
   muṟṟaṟ ciṟumanti muṟpaṭṭa tantaiyai
   neṟṟukkaṇ ṭaṉṉa viralāl ñemirttiṭṭuk
   kuṟṟip paṟikkum malaināṭa! iṉṉātē
   oṟṟumai koḷḷātār naṭpu.
   Friendship with the uncongenial is bad.
   Lord of the hilly land where the immature little monkey, with its
   finger like a bean-pod, will flip its father when it meets him, and
   poke him and snatch fruit from him! Afflictive indeed is friendship
   with the uncongenial.
   238. uṟṟaviṭat tutavuvatē uyarnta naṭpākum.
   muṭṭuṟṟa pōḻtiṉ muṭukieṉ āruyirai
   naṭṭāṉ oruvaṉkai nīṭṭēṉēl — naṭṭāṉ
   kaṭimaṉai kaṭṭaḻittāṉ celvuḻic celka
   neṭumoḻi vaiyam naka.
   The curse of him who does not offer his life for his friend.
   If I hasten not to put forth my hand and offer my precious life to my
   friend when in distress, may I depart whither he goes who has violated
   the sanctity of his friend's wedded wife, while the far-famed world
   laughs!
   239. pullaṟivuṭaiyār naṭpup poruntātu.
   āṉpaṭu neypey kalaṉuḷ atukaḷaintu
   vēmpaṭu neypey taṉaittarō ; —tēmpaṭu
   nalvarai nāṭa! nayamuṇarvār naṇporīip
   pullaṟivi ṉāroṭu naṭpu.
   Bitter for sweet.
   Lord of the land of goodly hills where honey flows! To forsake the
   friendship of those who know the right, and cultivate that of shallow
   pretenders to knowledge, is like emptying out cow's ghee from a vessel
   and pouring into it margosa oil.
   240. tīyiṉattāraic cērvatu tīmaiyām.
   uruviṟ kamaintāṉkaṇ ūrāṇmai iṉmai
   parukaṟ kamaintapāl nīraḷā yaṟṟē;
   terivuṭaiyār tīyiṉattā rākutal nākam
   viripeṭaiyō ṭāṭiviṭ ṭaṟṟu.
   A specious outward appearance without a liberal spirit
   The absence of generosity in those whose exterior is pleasing, is like
   the mingling of water with the milk provided for food: when men of
   understanding take to bad company it is like the disporting of a Cobra
   with a female viper.
   -------------

      25. aṟivuṭaimai / Ch. 25. The Possession of Practical Wisdom

   241. taḷarntāṟ pakaivarait tāṅkuvar mēlōr.
   pakaivar paṇiviṭam nōkkit takavuṭaiyār
   tāmēyum nāṇit talaiccellār kāṇāy;
   iḷampiṟai yāyakkāl tiṅkaḷaic cērā(tu)
   aṇaṅkarun tuppiṉ arā.
   Generosity to fallen foes.
   Worthy men, when they behold where foes are foiled, themselves too feel
   sore abashed, and do not hasten on to crush them. Behold, the strong
   invulnerable dragon draws not near the moon (to swallow it) when it is
   in its tender crescent days!
   242. aṭakkamē makkaṭku aṇikalam āvatu.
   naḷikaṭal taṇcērppa! nalkūrnta makkaṭ
   kaṇikala māva taṭakkam — paṇivilcīr
   māttirai yiṉṟi naṭakkumēl vāḻumūr
   kōttiraṅ kūṟap paṭum.
   Self-restraint, an ornament.
   Lord of the cool shore of the spreading sea ! To men in poverty a
   modest self-restraint is the chiefest ornament. If a man live in
   unbending pride, and in a manner unbefitting his position, his
   fellow-townsmen will revile his race.
   243. maṟumaiyiṉpamum tarum nalloḻukkam.
   ennilattu vittiṭiṉum kāñciraṅkāḻ teṅkākā(tu)
   ennāṭ ṭavarum cuvarkkam pukutalāl,
   taṉṉāṟṟāṉ ākum maṟumai vaṭaticaiyum
   koṉṉāḷar cālap palar.
   Character, not birthplace.
   Whatever soil you sow it in, the Strychnos nut grows not into a
   cocoa-palm. Some of the Southern land have entered Paradise! It is
   man's way of life that decides his future state. Full many from the
   Northern land are denizens of hell.
   244. iṉattāl mēlōr maṉam māṟupaṭātu.
   vēmpiṉ ilaiyuṭ kaṉiyiṉum vāḻaitaṉ
   tīñcuvai yātun tiriyātām; āṅkē
   iṉantī teṉiṉum iyalpuṭaiyār kēṇmai
   maṉantītām pakkam aritu.
   Good men not affected by corrupt influences.
   Though ripened amid margosa leaves the fruit of the plantain loses no
   atom of its sweet flavour. Even so the friendship of men of noble mood,
   although their race be evil, can hardly work ill to the mind.
   245. iyaṟkai yaṟivuṭaiyavar eṉṟum māṟupaṭār.
   kaṭalcārntum iṉṉīr piṟakkum, malaicārntum
   uppīṇ ṭuvari piṟattalāl ; tattam
   iṉattaṉaiya rallar eṟikaṭaltaṇcērppa!
   maṉattaṉaiyar makkaḷeṉ pār.
   Not environment, but mind makes the man.
   Though close by the sea, sweet waters oft-times spring up there; on the
   hill-side the waters often gush out all brine! Thus men are not as
   their race. — Lord of the dashing sea's cool shore! Men are as their
   minds.
   246. kūṭutal pirital cāṉṟōr kuṟittiṭār.
   parāaraip puṉṉai paṭukaṭal taṇ cērppa!
   orāalum oṭṭaluñ ceypavō? nalla
   marūuccey tiyārmāṭṭut taṅku maṉattār
   virāaayac ceyyāmai naṉṟu.
   Against caprice.
   Lord of the cool sea-shore, where flourishes the thick-stemmed laurel !
   Men whose minds are good (constant), and who adhere to whomsoever they
   have formed an intimacy with, will not sometimes avoid men, and at
   other times be intimate. It is good not to have fits of alternating
   warmth and indifference.
   247. aṟiñaraic cārntāl iṉpam aṇukum
   uṇara uṇarum uṇarvuṭai yāraip
   puṇariṟ puṇarumām. iṉpam ;—puṇariṉ
   teriyat teriyun terivilā tāraip
   piriyap piriyumām nōy.
   Good and bad associations.
   Join the men who throughly feel true wisdom's inner sense, and
   forthwith joy joins you. Join yourself to men devoid of the accurate
   preception of knowledge, and then parting from them is parting from
   pain.
   248. tāṉē taṉṉait talaivaṉ ākkalām.
   naṉṉilaikkaṇ taṉṉai niṟuppāṉum, taṉṉai
   nilaikalakkik kīḻiṭu vāṉum, —nilaiyiṉum
   mēṉmēl uyarttu niṟuppāṉum, taṉṉait
   talaiyākac ceyvāṉum tāṉ.
   Men makes, unmakes, and ennobles himself.
   He that establishes a man in good, and he that disturbs that good
   position and casts him down, and he that more and more exalts a man and
   establishes him, and he that makes a man head (among men) is (the MAN)
   HIMSELF.
   249. kāriyam muṭikkak kallār piṉṉum kaṟṟavar celvār.
   karuma varicaiyāṟ kallātār piṉṉum
   perumai yuṭaiyāruñ cēṟal — arumarapiṉ
   ōtam araṟṟum olikaṭal taṇcērppa!
   pētaimai yaṉṟa taṟivu.
   It is prudent sometimes to sacrifice pride.
   Lord of the cool shore of the sounding sea, where from old time the
   billows roar!— In the course of their affairs when even great men
   follow after the unlearned, this is not folly but wisdom.
   250. karumam pōkam tarumam mūṉṟum takkōr aṭaivar.
   karumamum uṭpaṭap pōkamum tuvvat
   tarumamum takkārkkē ceyyā — orunilaiyē
   muṭṭiṉṟi mūṉṟu muṭiyumēl aḵteṉpa
   paṭṭiṉam peṟṟa kalam.
   A perfect life-voyage.
   If a man has wrought all fitting works, enjoyed all seemly pleasures,
   done deeds of charity to worthy men: if he shall have accomplished all
   these three unchecked, in this one state, of him men will say: ‘that is
   a ship that has gained the haren'
   -------------

          26. aṟiviṉmai / Ch. 26. The Lack of Practical Wisdom

   251. aṟivē peruñcelvam ; aṟiviṉmai vaṟumaiyām.
   nuṇṇuṇar viṉmai vaṟumai, aḵtuṭaimai
   paṇṇap paṇaitta peruñcelvam ;—eṇṇuṅkāl
   peṇavāy āṇiḻanta pēṭi aṇiyāḷō,
   kaṇavāt takka kalam.
   Lack of accurate perception is poverty. Mere externals are nothing.
   The want of refined knowledge is poverty, its possession is very great
   and abundant wealth. When one considers, will not a sexless creature,
   more woman than man, adorn herself with the jewels that her eye desires
   ?
   252. celvamum aṟivum ōriṭam cērā.
   pallāṉṟa kēḷvip payaṉuṇarvār pāṭaḻintu
   allal uḻappa taṟitirēl — tolciṟappiṉ
   nāviṉ kiḻatti uṟaitalāṟ cērāḷē,
   pūviṉ kiḻatti pulantu.
   Why the goddess Fortuna avoids the learned.
   Men of vast and varied lore are seen in low estate, and suffer want.
   Would you know the reason? The anciently renowned ‘Lady of the tongue'
   abides with them). ‘The Lady of the flowers' is jealous, and draws not
   near !
   253. iḷamaiyiṟ kallāṉ iḻivupiṉ eytuvāṉ.
   kalleṉṟu tantai kaḻaṟa ataṉaiyōr
   colleṉṟu koḷḷā tikaḻntavaṉ , —mella
   eḻuttōlai pallārmuṉ nīṭṭa viḷiyā
   vaḻukkōlaik koṇṭu viṭum.
   Folly of refusing to learn in youth.
   He who, when his father urgently bade him learn, did not take it as a
   serious matter, but contemned it; when, before many men, some one
   gently presents a written palm-leaf, will in anger fetch a stick to
   beat him as guilty of an insult.
   254. kallātavaṉai nāy eṉṟē karutuvar.
   kallātu nīṇṭa oruvaṉ ulakattu
   nallaṟi vāḷa riṭaippukku — mella
   iruppiṉum nāyirun taṟṟē, irāa(tu)
   uraippiṉum nāykurait taṟṟu.
   An ignorant man is a mere cur!
   When a man who has grown up without learning enters the society of the
   wise, if he sit still, it is as if a dog sat there; and if he rise to
   speak, it is as though a dog barked.
   255. pullar avaiyiṟ kallār pukuvar.
   pullāppuṉ kōṭṭip pulava riṭaippukkuk
   kallāta collum kaṭaiyellām ;—kaṟṟa
   kaṭāayiṉum cāṉṟavar collār poruḷmēṟ
   paṭāa viṭupāk kaṟintu.
   Cast not pearls before swine.
   All the baser sort consorting with scholars of a heterodox and low
   school, will utter illiterate rubbish; but men replete with learning,
   though urgently asked, utter not the results of their learning, knowing
   that (the asker) would fail to apply their minds to the import of what
   was said.
   256. kallār virivurai yellām pakarvar.
   kaṟṟaṟinta nāviṉār collārtam cōrvañci;
   maṟṟaiya rāvār pakarvar ; paṉaiyiṉmēl
   vaṟṟiya ōlai kalakalakkum; eññāṉṟum
   paccōlaik killai oli.
   Modest silence.
   Men of learned tongues are silent, fearing some slip; others (ignorant
   men) will speak out; on the Palmyra tree the dried-up leaves make a
   loud rustling noise ; but evermore the green leaf gives forth no sound
   !
   257. aṟivilār ceviyil aṟavurai ēṟātu.
   paṉṟikkūḻp pattaril tēmā vaṭittaṟṟāl
   naṉṟaṟiyā māntark kaṟattā ṟuraikkuṅkāl ;
   kuṉṟiṉmēṟ koṭṭun taṟipōl talaitakarntu
   ceṉṟicaiyā vākum cevikku.
   Good instruction thrown away on thankless people.
   When you expound the way of virtue to ungrateful people, —which is like
   mashing up sweet mangoes for a pig in a food — trough , — those
   virtuous teachings lose all their force —have their point (talai)
   broken (takar) by the obtuseness of the disciple— and do not enter
   into, or suit his ear, — like a stake which one would drive in on the
   side of a hill.
   258. nōlā uṭampil aṟivu nuḻaiyātu.
   pālāṟ kaḻīip palanāḷ uṇakkiṉum
   vālitām pakkam iruntaik kiruntaṉṟu;
   kōlāṟ kaṭāayk kuṟiṉum pukalollā
   nōlā uṭampiṟ kaṟivu.
   Learning requires discipline.
   Though you wash it with milk for many days and dry it, charcoal on no
   hypothesis becomes white ! So into the undisciplined body wisdom enters
   not, though you teach it, driving it in with a stick.
   259. iḻiceyal naṭuvar nallaṟivu illār.
   poḻintiṉitu nāṟiṉum pūmicaital cellā
   tiḻintavai kāmuṟūum īppōl — iḻintavai
   tāṅkalanta neñciṉārk keṉṉākum? takkārvāyt
   tēṉkalanta tēṟṟaccol tērvu.
   The fly desires not the fragrant honey. The base esteem not sweet and
   powerful words.
   To those whose minds are full of foul things, — like the fly which goes
   not to feed on the flower that pours forth sweetness and breathes
   perfume, but fixes its eager desire on ordure,—What clear comprehension
   can there be of the lucid words full of honied sweetness that issue
   from the mouths of the worthy?
   260. kīḻmakaṉ tuṇṇiya kēḷviyai virumpāṉ.
   kaṟṟār uraikkuṅ kacaṭaṟu nuṇkēḷvi
   paṟṟātu taṉneñ cutaittalāl, —maṟṟumōr
   taṉpōl oruvaṉ mukanōkkit tāṉumōr
   puṉkōṭṭi koḷḷumām kīḻ.
   The base man rejects the words of the learned, and seeks the assembly
   of congenial fools.
   The base man does not apprehend the faultless words of accurate
   instruction which the learned utter. These pain his mind. He therefore
   looks in the face of some other one like himself (for encouragement),
   and convenes a wretched assembly of his own: i.e. He finds one
   like-minded, and the two set up a sect.
   -------------

          27. naṉṟiyil celvam / Ch. 27. Wealth that profits not

   261 naṉṟiyil celvarai nāṭār aṟiñar.
   arukala tākip palapaḻuttak kaṇṇum
   poritāḷ viḷaviṉai vāval kuṟukā;
   peritaṇiya rāyiṉum vīṭilār celvam
   karutum kaṭappāṭṭa taṉṟu.
   Useless neighbours : so near and yet so far.
   The bat approaches not the Heronia, with its dry stem, though it be
   night at hand and bear abundant fruit; so although mean people are very
   close at hand, their wealth is not a thing that can be counted upon.
   262. celvam iruppiṉum kīḻōraic cērār.
   aḷḷikkoḷ vaṉṉa kuṟumukiḻa vāyiṉum
   kaḷḷimēṟ kainnīṭṭār cūṭumpū aṉmaiyāl
   celvam perituṭaiyarāyiṉum kīḻkaḷai
   naḷḷār aṟivuṭai yār.
   None pluck the Kalli flowers. The wise approach not the base.
   Men reach not out their band to the Kalli (Cactus), though it bears
   delicate round buds by the handful, because these are not flowers they
   can weave into a garland to crown themselves withal; so wise people
   from no friendships with the base however great their wealth may be.
   263. īyāc celvariṭam evarum cērār.
   malku tiraiya kaṭaṟkōṭ ṭiruppiṉum
   vallūṟ ṟuvaril kiṇaṟṟiṉkaṭ ceṉṟuṇpar :
   celvam perituṭaiya rāyiṉum, cēṭṭucaṉṟum
   nalkuvār kaṭṭē nacai.
   Though living on the sea-shore, men go to the fresh spring to drink.
   Though men live on the curved shore of the sea with its multitudinous
   waves, they go and drink at the well, with its perennial fountain of
   fresh water from the rock; so even if those (who are neighbours) are
   very wealthy, the desire (of the poor) is towards the liberal, though
   these may be far to seek.
   264. aṟivilār celvarāy yāṇṭum vāḻkiṉṟār.
   puṇarkaṭalcūḻ vaiyattup puṇṇiyamō vēṟē;
   uṇarva tuṭaiyār iruppa — uṇarvilā
   vaṭṭum vaḻutuṇaiyum pōlvārum vāḻvarē,
   paṭṭum tukilum uṭuttu.
   The senseless dressed in silks ! Virtue quite another matter.
   In the world surrounded by the (all-)embracing sea, merit is quite an
   indifferent matter! Understanding ones are (poor); and even those of no
   understanding—who are like mere palm tree tufts and brinjals—live
   prosperously, clad in silks and rich garments.
   265. kallār celvattiṟkuk kāraṇam viṉaiyē :
   nallār nayavariruppa nayamilāk
   kallārkkoṉ ṟākiya kāraṇam,— tollai
   viṉaippaya ṉallatu vēlneṭuṅ kaṇṇāy!
   niṉaippa varuvatoṉ ṟil.
   Men fortunate who seem not to deserve it.
   While pleasant folk and just abide (in poverty), you ponder why men
   unjust and ignorant have any joy. It is fruit of 'ancient deeds', thou
   whose long eyes are darts :—to thoughtful mind no other cause occurs.
   266. paṇpilār celvam payaṉillātatu.
   nāṟāt takaṭēpōl naṉmalarmēṟ poṟpāvāy!
   nīṟāy nilattu viḷiyarō ;—vēṟāya
   puṉmakkaḷ pakkam pukuvāynī poṉpōlum
   naṉmakkaḷ pakkam tuṟantu.
   Fortune cursed.
   O golden dame, that sittest like a scentless leaf on a beauteous
   flower! Die, and fall in ashes to the ground: thou enterest homes of
   worthless men of perverse mind, forsaking good men pure as gold.
   267. aṟiñar vaṟumaiyum aṟivilār celvamum aṭaivatu viyappē.
   nayavārkaṇ nalkuravu nāṇiṉṟu kollō ;
   payavārkaṭ celvam parampap payiṉkol ;
   viyavāykāṇ vēṟkaṇṇāy ivviraṇṭum āṅkē
   nayavātu niṟkum nilai.
   Poverty with the good, and prosperity with the mean.
   Has poverty, that bides with men of righteous souls, no shame? Does
   wealth to ungenerous men stick like glue?O thou of dart-like eye, with
   wonder see that thus, no just discernment made, these two abide !
   268. pulliyōr celvam poruttam illātatu.
   valavaika ḷallātār kālāṟu ceṉṟu
   kalavaikaḷ uṇṭu kaḻippar — valavaikaḷ
   kālāṟum cellār karuṉaiyāl tuyppavē
   mēlāṟu pāya viruntu.
   The self-dying and the self-indulgent.
   Men who are not void of shame will travel forth on foot, and feed on
   scraps, —so pass their days ; the shameless ones make no journeys on
   foot, but feed on dainties at home, perspiring over the feast.
   269. aṟivillār celvam tarupayaṉ oṉṟillai.
   poṉṉiṟac cenneṟ potiyoṭu pīḷvāṭa,
   miṉṉoḷir vāṉam kaṭaluḷḷum kāṉṟukukkum;
   veṇmai yuṭaiyār viḻuccelva meytiyakkāl
   vaṇmaiyu maṉṉa takaittu.
   Misplaced liberality; rain on the sea.
   While the red paddy's golden germ is parched within the ear and dies,
   the cloud gleaming with lightnings pours forth its treasures on the
   sea. When silly men gain ample wealth, even so are their liberal gifts
   bestowed !
   270. īyār eṉṉiṟ celvarum vaṟiñarē.
   ōtiyum ōtār uṇarvilār ōtātum
   ōti yaṉaiyār uṇarvuṭaiyār : — tūytāka
   nalkūrntum celvar iravā tār,celvarum
   nalkūrntār īyā reṉiṉ.
   The unintelligent never learn; the intelligent perceive without
   learning.
   Men void of understanding, though they learn, learn not! Men of
   understanding, though unlearned, are as men learned! They are rich,
   though utter paupers, who never beg; the rich are paupers if they
   bestow nothing !
   -------------

           28. īyāmai /Ch. 28. Absence of Charity; or, the Miser

   271. pakuttuṇṇātavar pukār mēlulakam.
   naṭṭārkkum naḷḷā tavarkkum uḷavaraiyāl
   aṭṭatu pāttuṇṭal aṭṭuṇṭal;—aṭṭa
   taṭaittirun tuṇṭoḻukum āvatil mākkaṭku
   aṭaikkumām āṇṭaik katavu.
   Share your food with friends and foes. To the selfish heaven's gate is
   closed.
   To eat your own meal, after sharing what you have cooked, to the extent
   of your ability, both with those who are friends and those who are not
   friends, is 'cooking and eating' (= is real house keeping). To the
   good-for-nothing human beings whose habit of life it is to shut
   themselves up and eat alone what they have cooked, the door of yonder
   world will be shut.
   272. iyaṉṟa aṟañceytāl piṟavippayaṉ eytalām.
   ettuṇai yāṉum iyainta aḷaviṉāl
   ciṟṟaṟañ ceytār talaippaṭuvar; —maṟṟaip
   peruñcelvam eytiyakkāl piṉaṟitum eṉpār
   aḻintār paḻikaṭalat tuḷ.
   Give what you can, when you can.
   Whatever the measure be, those who do even lesser acts of charity to
   the measure of their power shall attain to excellence. But those who,
   when they have obtained great wealth. say 'we will be wise (and give)
   by and by,' are lost in a sea of guilt.
   273. īyāta oruvaṉai ellārum ikaḻvar.
   tuyattuk kaḻiyāṉ tuṟavōrkkoṉ ṟīkalāṉ
   vaittuk kaḻiyum maṭavōṉai — vaitta
   poruḷum avaṉai nakumē ; ulakat
   taruḷum avaṉai nakum.
   The miser contemptible.
   The senseless man who spends not time in enjoyment (of his wealth), and
   who gives nothing to pions devotees, but hoards and dies, —him his
   hoarded wealth derides; him all that is gracious in the world derides.
   274. īyār celvam piṉ ētilār aṭaivar.
   koṭuttalum tuyttalum tēṟṟā iṭukkuṭai
   uḷḷattāṉ peṟṟa peruñcelvam illat
   turuvuṭaik kaṉṉiyaraip pōlap paruvattāl
   ētilāṉ tuykkap paṭum.
   The miser loses what he hoards.
   The great wealth obtained by the man of straitened soul, who knows not
   how either to give or to enjoy, shall be enjoyed by a stranger, in due
   season—like lovely virgins remaining unmarried in the dwelling.
   275. piṟarkyōtavar peruñcelvattiṉum cāṉṟōr vaṟumai taṉicciṟappuṭaiyatu.
   eṟinīrp peruṅkaṭal eyti yiruntum
   aṟunīrc ciṟukiṇaṟ ṟūṟalpārt tuṇpar;
   maṟumai yaṟiyātā rākkattiṉ cāṉṟōr
   kaḻinal kuravē talai.
   Poverty better than the wealth of those who live for this world alone.
   Though they have got the mighty sea with its dashing waves (to drink
   from), men wait for the stream slowly issuing from the little well,
   often dry, and drink there; so the exceeding poverty of the virtuous is
   preferable to the wealth of those who know not of the world to come.
   276. yātavaṉ poruḷ yārkkum uriyatām.
   eṉateṉa teṉṟirukkum ēḻai poruḷai
   eṉateṉa teṉṟiruppaṉ yāṉum;—taṉatāyiṉ
   tāṉum ataṉai vaḻaṅkāṉ payaṉtuvvāṉ ;
   yāṉum ataṉai atu.
   Whose is the miser's wealth?
   As to the property which the wretched churl claims saying 'It is mine,
   it is mine ,' I too chime in with "It is mine, it is mine;' for if it
   is his, he himself spends it not, nor enjoys the benefit of it; and I,
   too, neither spend nor enjoy it!
   277. vaṟumaiyuṭaiyavar celvarpōl varuntār.
   vaḻaṅkāta celvariṉ nalkūrntār uyntār ;
   iḻantār eṉappaṭutal uyntār — uḻantataṉaik
   kāppurintār kallutalum uyntārtam kainnōvu
   yāppuyntār uynta pala .
   Poor men better off than churls.
   The poor have escaped much from which rich men that dispense not
   suffer. They have escaped the reputation of having lost (their
   substance). They have escaped the toil of saving it. They have escaped
   (the labour of) digging (to hide it). They have escaped the ache of
   hands securing it from powerful plunderers. Many are the (sorrows) they
   have escaped.
   278. uriya poruḷai uṭaṉpakuttu uṇṇuka.
   taṉatākat tāṉkoṭāṉ; tāyat tavarum
   tamatāya pōḻtē koṭāar : — taṉatāka
   muṉṉē koṭuppiṉ avarkaṭiyār, tāṉkaṭiyāṉ
   piṉṉai avarkoṭukkum pōḻtu.
   Nothing but his own churlishness hinders the churl from being liberal.
   While it was his he gave not; and his heirs, how it is theirs, give
   not. Before, while it was his, if he had given, they would not have
   reproved (him); and afterwards, if they had given, he would not have
   reproved them! Men's own avarice is the sole reason for the lack of
   charity.
   279.varuttiṉāṟ koṭuppar tamporuḷaik kīḻmakkaṉ.
   iravalar kaṉṟāka īvārāvāka
   virakiṉ curappatām vaṇmai ; —virakiṉṟi
   vallavar vāṉṟa vaṭiyāpōl vāyvaittuk
   kollac curappatām kīḻ.
   Those wanting in liberal instinct give only on compulsion.
   Liberality is that which yields its gifts spontaneously (from good
   instinct), the askers being as the calf and the givers as the cow;
   meanness yields only when put into a strait and forced, as a cow with
   no good instinct gives a scanty supply (vaṭi) when strong ones press.
   280. īṭṭum poruḷāl eytum pala tuyar.
   īṭṭalum tuṉpamaṟ ṟīṭṭiya oṇporuḷaik
   kāttalum āṅkē kaṭuntuṉpam ;—kāttal
   kuṟaipaṭiṉ tuṉpam keṭiṉtuṉpam tuṉpak
   kuṟaipati maṟṟaip poruḷ.
   Wealth is the source of many sorrows.
   Gathering it together is trouble, and even so the guarding of
   resplendent wealth is severe trouble. If the guarded heap diminish, it
   is trouble. If it perish, it is trouble. Wealth is trouble's very
   dwelling-place!
   ---------------

                        29. iṉmai / Ch. 29. Poverty

   281. poruḷillāraip piṇampōlavē matippār.
   attiṭṭa kūṟai araiccuṟṟi vāḻiṉum
   patteṭ ṭuṭaimai palaruḷḷum pāṭeytum;
   otta kuṭippiṟantak kaṇṇumoṉ ṟillātār
   cetta piṇattiṟ kaṭai.
   Money commands respect.
   Though he wraps a cloth dyed red around his loins, a dozen coins or so,
   will gain (the wretch) respect among many men! The man devoid of
   wealth, though born of noble race, is viler (in the world's estimation)
   than a lifeless corpse !
   282. irappavaṉ ellā iṭamum pukuvāṉ.
   nīriṉum nuṇṇitu neyeṉpar, neyyiṉum
   yārum aṟivar pukai nuṭpam ; —tēriṉa,
   nirappiṭumpai yāḷaṉ pukumē, pukaiyum
   pukaṟkariya pūḻai nuḻaintu.
   The insinuating mendicant.
   Where water cannot enter! the more insinuating ghi glides in; and smoke
   as a subtler power to penetrate than even ghi. If you look into it, the
   man debased by poverty will enter haunts where smoke scarce finds a
   way.
   283. vaṟumai yuṭaiyavarpāl uṟaviṉar vārār.
   kallōṅ kuyarvaraimēṟ kāntaḷ malarākkāl
   cellāvām cempoṟi vaṇṭiṉam ;—kollaik
   kalāal kiḷikaṭiyum kāṉaka nāṭa!
   ilāaark killai tamar.
   All abandon the needy.
   When on the high hill's crags the Kanthal blooms no more, the
   crimson-spotted beetle tribe seek not its boughs;—Lord of the hills
   wherefrom they scare parrots with stones! — the needy have no kin.
   284. celvar iṭattil ellārum cērvār.
   uṇṭāya pōḻtiṉ uṭaintuḻik kākampōl
   toṇṭā yiravar tokupvē ; —vaṇṭāyt
   tiritaruṅ kālattut tītilirō eṉpār
   oruvarum ivvulakat til.
   Time-serving friends.
   When wealth is there, obsequious myriads will assemble, like crows
   around the fallen corpse. When wealth, as the beetle wheels its flight,
   is gone, no one in all the world will ask, ‘Is it well with you?'
   285. āṇmai kulam kalvi aḻiyum vaṟumaiyāl.
   piṟanta kulammāyum; pērāṇmai māyum;
   ciṟantataṅ kalviyum māyum; —kaṟaṅkaruvi
   kalmēṟ karūum kaṇamalai naṉṉāṭa!
   iṉmai taḻuvappaṭṭārkku.
   Nothing benefits the poor man.
   Lord of the pleasant land of clustering hills whose crags are washed by
   sounding waterfalls !—Their race is nought, their manly prowess is
   nought, their rare learning is nought, when men are held in poverty's
   embrace.
   286. vaṟiyavaṉ vāḻviṉāṟ piṟarpayaṉ aṭaiyār.
   uḷkūr paciyāl uḻainacaiic ceṉṟārkaṭ
   kuḷḷū riruntumoṉ ṟāṟṟātāṉ, —uḷḷūr
   iruntuyir koṉṉē kaḻiyātu tāṉpōy
   viruntiṉaṉātalē naṉṟu.
   Let the churl become a guest of others!
   Although he dwells within the village, and sees the poor draw nigh with
   hungry soul desiring aid, he yields them none : why then in the village
   does he vainly pass his days? It were better he went to be a guest
   himself !
   287. vaṟumai vantāl aṟivum nīṅkum.
   nīrmaiyē yaṉṟi nirampa eḻuntataṅ
   kūrmaiyu mellām oruṅkiḻappar ;—kūrmaiyiṉ
   mullai alaikkum eyiṟṟāy ; nirappeṉṉum
   allal aṭaiyappaṭṭār.
   Poverty ruins all.
   O thou whose teeth vie in sharpness with jasmine buds! — When sharp
   distress of poverty assails, men lose all their attributes of goodness
   at once, with the mind's acuteness gained from amplest stores of
   wisdom.
   288. piṟarkku utavātavaṉ irappatē naṉṟu.
   iṭṭāṟṟup paṭṭoṉ ṟirantavark kāṟṟātu
   muṭṭāṟṟup paṭṭum muyaṉṟuḷḷūr vāḻtaliṉ
   neṭṭāṟṟuc ceṉṟu niraimaṉaiyiṟ kainnīṭṭuṅ
   koṭṭāṟṟu vāḻkkaiyē naṉṟu.
   The struggle with want.
   Better indeed is the life that pertains to the ruinous course (keṭṭa
   āṟu), that going far away (neṭṭāṟu), stretches out (supplicating) hand
   at every door, than to dwell at home (uḷḷūr ) toiling, subjectto
   (āṟṟuppaṭṭu ) obstacles (muttu ). not giving aught to those that ask,
   because of straitened circumstances.
   289. uppilāk kīraiyum uṇpār vaṟiyavar.
   kaṭakam ceṟintataṅkaikaḷāl vāṅki
   aṭaku paṟittukkoṇ ṭaṭṭuk —kuṭaikalaṉā
   uppili ventaitiṉṟuḷḷaṟṟu vāḻpavē,
   tuppuravu ceṉṟulantak kāl.
   Reverses.
   The hands once loaded with golden bracelets now cull the forest-herb
   and cook the meal; and then eat the mess unseasoned, from the palm-leaf
   for a dish! Thus sad at heart they live, when fortune is gone and ruin
   come.
   290. celvavāḻvu illaiyēṟ cuṟṟamum illai.
   ārtta poṟiya aṇikiḷar vaṇṭiṉam
   pūttoḻi kompiṉmēṟ cellāvām; —nīrttaruvi
   tāḻā uyarciṟappiṉ taṇkuṉṟa naṉṉāṭa!
   vāḻātārk killai tamar.
   Interested friends.
   The humming spotted beetle tribes all bright in hue gather not on the
   branch that has ceased to blow. Lord of the good cool hilly land, of
   high renown, whence bounteous streams flow down unceasingly—the
   unprosperous have no kin!
   --------------

                 30. māṉam Ch. 30. Honour (Self-respect.)

   291. māṉam uṭaiyāṉ maṉam kaṉalpōṉṟatu.
   tirumatukai yākat tiṟaṉilār ceyyum
   perumitaṅ kaṇṭak kaṭaittum — erimaṇṭik
   kāṉan talaippaṭṭa tīppōṟ kaṉalumē,
   māṉa muṭaiyār maṉam.
   Honourable minds are wroth with wealthy arrogance.
   The mind of those possessed of honourable feeling will kindle into
   flame, like the fire that has caught the forest when the conflagration
   rages, whenever they behold the haughty acts of those who are destitute
   of virtuous habits, and to whom their wealth is their only strength.
   292. uraiyāṉ taṉkuṟai māṉam uṭaiyavaṉ.
   eṉpāy ukiṉum iyalpilār piṉ ceṉṟu
   tampā ṭuraipparō tammuṭaiyār; —tampā(ṭu)
   uraiyāmai muṉṉuṇarum oṇmai yuṭaiyārk(ku)
   uraiyārō tāmuṟṟanōy.
   High-minded men complain not to the unsympathizing.
   Will (honourable men who are) 'masters of themselves' follow graceless
   men to tell of their sufferings, tbough fallen away to mere skeletons ?
   Do they not (rather) tell the pain they have felt to those enlightened
   souls that understand their sufferings before they speak ?
   293. māṉam uḷḷavaṉ celvarai matiyāṉ.
   yāmāyiṉ emillam kāṭṭutum tāmāyiṉ
   kāṇavē kaṟpaḻiyum eṉpārpōl — nāṇip
   puṟaṅkaṭai vaittīvar cōṟum ataṉāl
   maṟantiṭuka celvar toṭarpu.
   Dependence on the wealthy destroys self-respect.
   As for ourselves we would introduce them (these friends) to our
   household : but as regards them, they are ashamed (of us), as though
   they said, as soon as they (the ladies) saw them (the friends,) it
   would be the destruction of their womanly reserve; and so they seat us
   at the backdoor and give us rice! Therefore let us dismiss all thought
   of rich men's friendship.
   294. immaiyum maṟumaiyum iṉpamtarum māṉam.
   immaiyum naṉṟām iyalneṟiyuṅ kaiviṭā
   tummaiyum nalla payattalāl, —cemmaiyiṉ
   nāṉam kamaḻum katuppiṉāy! naṉṟēkāṇ,
   māṉa muṭaiyār matippu.
   The law of honour is that maintained by honourable men.
   O thou whose locks diffuse the odour of pleasant musk! Behold,
   especially good is (it to cultivate) that which is esteemed by men of
   honourable mind; for in this world it is (obviously) good : and, since
   it leads to perseverance in the way of virtue, it will yield good
   things in yonder world also.
   295. aṟiñar paḻipāvaṅkaṭku añcuvār.
   pāvamum ēṉaip paḻiyum paṭavaruva
   cāyiṉum cāṉṟāvā ceykalār ; cātal
   orunāḷ orupoḻutait tuṉpam avaipōl
   arukavai yāṟṟutal iṉṟu.
   Dishonour worse than death.
   The men 'fulfilled of excellence,' though death were the alternative,
   do not deeds that entail sin and guilt. Death is an affliction for one
   day, and for a little while. There is nothing that works irreparable
   ill like those (deeds).
   296. iravātavarē peruñ celvar eṉpavar.
   mallaṉmā ñālattu vāḻpavaruḷḷellām
   celva reṉiṉum koṭātavar nalkūrntār;
   nalkūrntak kaṇṇum perumut taraiyarē,
   celvaraic ceṉṟiravu tār.
   The wealthy and the poor.
   Poor are the men that give not, even though deemed wealthiest of all
   that flourish on the teeming apple earth! They who even when they are
   poor seek not as suppliants wealthy men are 'Lords of the three mighty
   lands.'
   297. tūyamaṉattavar coṟpaḻikku añcuvar.
   kaṭaiyelām kāypaci añcumaṟ ṟēṉai
   iṭaiyelām iṉṉāmai añcum — puṭaiparanta
   viṟpuruva vēlneṭuṅ kaṇṇāy! talaiyellām
   coṟpaḻi añci viṭum.
   The honourable dread most the loss of reputation.
   Thou who hast long dart-like eyes with eye-brows extending far, like a
   bow! the lowest class of men dread burning hunger; the other (or middle
   class) dread what is unpleasant; all the chief of men fear words that
   impute crime.
   298. celvar ciṟunōkkam nallōrai varuttum.
   nallā peritaḷiyar nalkūrntār eṉṟeḷḷic
   celvar ciṟunōkku nōkkuṅkāl — kollaṉ
   ulaiyūtun tīyēpōl uḷkaṉalum kollō
   talaiyāya cāṉṟōr maṉam.
   The rich man's contemptuous pity.
   When the very worthy and thoroughly learned see the rich men's glance
   of disparagement, as they say contemptuously, 'These are good people
   —persons in greatly reduced circumstances—poor folks,' does not their
   mind kindle into flame within them, like the fire by the breath of the
   bellows on the blacksmith's forge?
   299. tamatu kulamēṉmaiyum cāṟṟār māṇikaṉ.
   nācciyārk kiyāmai nāṇaṉṟu; nāḷnāḷum
   accattāl nāṇutal nāṇaṉṟām; —eccattil
   melliya rākittam mēlāyār ceytatu
   collā tiruppatu nāṇ.
   What is dishonouring.
   It is no shame (disgrace) not to (be able to give to those who desire
   it of us. The shrinking on account of fear (felt) day by day is not
   shame (modesty). But to become reduced in other ways, and not to [dare
   to] tell what injuries those who love us not have inflicted on us is
   shame (disgrace, or self-respect).
   300. māṉaṅ keṭavariṉum vāṉulakum vēṇṭār.
   kaṭamā tolaicciya kāṉuṟai vēṅkai
   iṭam vīḻnta tuṇṇā tiṟakkum;—iṭamuṭaiya
   vāṉakam kaiyuṟiṉum vēṇṭār viḻumiyōr,
   māṉam aḻuṅka variṉ.
   Heaven itself must not be sought at the expense of honour
   The jungle-haunting tiger that slays the wild cow, refuses to eat and
   passes by what has fallen (of itself) in its path (i. e. carrion); so
   the excellent, though the wide realms of heaven were within their
   reach, would not desire them, if to be obtained (only) by the loss of
   honour.
   --------------

               31. iravaccam /Ch. 31. The Dread of Mendicancy.

   301. teḷinta aṟiviṉar mayaṅkiṉōr piṉcelvār.
   nammālē yāvarin nalkūrntār eññāṉṟun
   tammālām ākkam ilareṉṟu — tammai
   maruṇṭa maṉattārpiṉ celpavō tāmum
   teruṇṭa aṟivi ṉavar.
   Ignorant condescending patrons.
   Will men themselves possessed of clear discerning knowledge follow
   after those who have yielded themselves up to mental bewilderment, and
   who (erroneously) say (of suppliants), ‘These poor folks depend
   entirely on us, evermore are they without resources in themselves ?'
   302. iḻiceyal vāḻviṉum iṟappatu naṉṟu.
   iḻittakka ceytoruvaṉ āra uṇaliṉ
   paḻittakka ceyyāṉ pacittal tavaṟō
   viḻittimaikku māttirai yaṉṟō? oruvaṉ
   aḻittup piṟakkum piṟappu.
   Honest hunger and dishonest fulness of food.
   Is not a man's dying and birth again measured by the twinkling of an
   eye? Is it then a fault if a man rather choose to suffer hunger, doing
   no blameworthy actions, than to feed full, doing things that entail
   disgrace ?
   303. aṉpiṉ iṭattē mēṉmakkaḷ aṇukuvar.
   illāmai kantā iravu tuṇintoruvar
   cellāru mallar ciṟuneṟi ;—pullā
   akampukumiṉ uṇṇumiṉ eṉpavarmāṭ ṭallāl
   mukampukutal āṟṟumō mēl?
   Ask only of the courteous.
   There will never be wanting those who, with their destitution as their
   support (making it their excuse), will venture upon mendicancy, and
   tread the way of humiliation; but will the noble-minded man enter (as a
   suppliant) the presence of any save of those who will embrace him and
   say, 'Enter my dwelling, eat of my food ?'
   304. celvarpiṉ ceṉṟu nillār nallōr.
   tiruttaṉṉai nīppiṉum teyvam ceṟiṉum
   urutta maṉattō ṭuyarvuḷḷi ṉallāl,
   aruttam ceṟikkum aṟivilār piṉceṉ
   ṟeruttiṟaiñci nillātām mēl.
   No reverses bend the noble spirit.
   Though fortune forsake him, and fate frown, the man of lofty soul,
   dwelling with steadfast mind on things above, disdains to stand with
   bending neck in the train of the foolish who hoard their wealth.
   305. karavā naṇparaiyum iravār mēlōr.
   karavāta tiṇṇaṉpiṉ kaṇṇaṉṉār kaṇṇum.
   iravātu vāḻvatām vāḻkkai ;—iraviṉai
   uḷḷuṅkāl uḷḷam urukumāl, eṉkolō
   koḷḷuṅkāl koḷvār kuṟippu.
   Mendicancy is always painful.
   To live asking naught even from those dear as an eye, whose love is
   sure, and who never refuse, is happy life. Since the mind dissolves in
   shame at the very thought of beggary,— when men receive alms, what are
   the receivers' thoughts, I pray ?
   306. ayalārai irappatāl payaṉ yātum millai.
   iṉṉā iyaika iṉiya oḻikeṉṟu
   taṉṉaiyē tāṉirappat tīrvataṟku — eṉṉaikol
   cātal kavaṟṟum maṉattiṉāl kaṇpāḻpaṭ
   ṭēti lavarai iravu.
   Contentment better than mendicancy.
   When a man himself, begs of himself, saying, ‘Let troubles come, let
   joys depart!' the sting of poverty is extracted; why then, for this
   purpose, should any one, his mind agitated with desire, and his eye
   wasted with weeping, beg of strangers ?
   307. irappārai ikaḻātu iruppavaṉ ciṟantōṉ.
   eṉṟum putiyār piṟappiṉum ivvulakat
   teṉṟum avaṉē piṟakkalāṉ — kuṉṟiṉ
   parappelām poṉṉoḻukum pāyaruvi nāṭa!
   irappārai eḷḷā makaṉ.
   Beggars are universally despised.
   Lord of the land where gold is borne down by rushing waterfalls from
   every hilly slope! — Though in this world new (kinds of) men are
   continually born, that very man is never born that does not scorn
   mendicants.
   308. īeṉa virappatu mikavum iḻivām.
   puṟattuttāṉ iṉmai naliya akattuttaṉ
   naṉñāṉam nīkki niṟīi oruvaṉai
   īyāy eṉakkeṉ ṟirappāṉēl annilaiyē
   māyāṉō māṟṟi viṭiṉ.
   Mendicancy is unmitigated misery.
   Want wastes his outward frame; he lays aside wisdom, his inward being's
   good; and so resolving, begs of some stranger, saying, 'Give to me.’—
   If then the boon be refused, must he not that very instant die?
   309. vaṟiñar celvaraic cārntu vāḻka.
   oruva roruvaraic cārntoḻukal āṟṟi
   vaḻipaṭutal valluta lallāl, —paricaḻintu
   ceyyīrō eṉṉāṉum eṉṉuñcoṟ kiṉṉātē
   paiyattāṉ cellum neṟi?
   A hermitage preferable to mendicancy.
   Men form close intimacies with others and live as their dependants, and
   this is permissible ; but is it more painful quietly to go one's way
   (to the hermitage) than, lost to all sense of personal dignity, to say,
   'Will ye not do aught for me?’
   310. paḻamaipaṟṟik kiḻamai pārāṭṭuka.
   paḻamaikan tākap pacainta vaḻiyē
   kiḻamaitāṉ yātāṉuñ ceyka ;—kiḻamai
   poṟāar avareṉṉiṉa pottittam neñcattu
   taṟāac cuṭuvatōr tī.
   Relieve the wants of old friendsthough they shrink from it.
   Relying on old friendship, in an affectionate manner, render such
   assistance as your intimacy Warrants. If he will not endure (the
   assistance), will it not be a fire heaped up and burning in his bosom?
   ----------------

          32. avaiyaṟital / Ch. 32. The Knowledge of the Assembly

   311. ciṟṟaṟiviṉar avai cērār aṟiñar.
   meyññāṉak kōṭṭi uṟaḻvaḻi viṭṭāṅkōr
   aññāṉan tantiṭ ṭatuvāṅ kaṟattuḻāyk
   kaiññāṉaṅ koṇṭoḻukuṅ kāraṟi vāḷarmuṉ
   coṉñāṉam cōra viṭal.
   Cast not pearls before swine.
   Decline entirely to utter words of wisdom before heretics (kāraṟivāḷar
   = men of darkened knowledge — men who professing to be wise, have their
   understanding darkened), who having forsaken the way pertaining to the
   assemblies of true wisdom, have there laid down propositions of
   unwisdom, and propagating them diligently, live in accordance with
   their own shallow wisdom!
   312. pōlip pulavarpāṟ yōkār pulavar.
   nāppāṭam colli nayamuṇarvār pōṟceṟikkum
   tīppulavaṟ cērār ceṟivuṭaiyār ;— tīppulavaṉ
   kōṭṭiyuṭ kuṉṟak kuṭippaḻikkum allākkāl
   tōṭṭaik koḷḷā eḻum.
   Avoid the angry violent disputant.
   Well-disciplined men come not near the heretic (=man of evil learning,
   the teacher of an evil system), who stores up (in his memory certain
   formulas, comp. 304), as though he understood their worth, and repeats
   them by rote (lit. as a tongue-lesson). The heretic, if worsted in the
   assembly, will abuse the family (of his opponents); or he will spring
   up and challenge them to fight.
   313. kaṟṟatu aṟiyāmaṟ kaḻaṟuvar pētaiyar.
   coṟṟāṟṟuk koṇṭu cuṉaitteḻutal kāmuṟuvar
   kaṟṟāṟṟal vaṉmaiyun tāntēṟār , —kaṟṟa
   celavuraikkum āṟṟiyār, tōṟpa taṟiyār,
   palavuraikkum māntar palar.
   Vain babblers.
   Many are the men that utter many things,—who long to raise up (in
   debate), from mere love of talking and an itching tongue; who do not
   themselves apprehend the power and might of learning; who know not the
   way to utter with penetrating force whatthey have learnt; and who know
   not what defeat means.
   314. pētai pullaṟivaip pēci veḷippaṭuttum.
   kaṟṟatūu miṉṟik kaṇakkāyar pāṭattāl
   peṟṟatām pētaiyōr cūttiram — maṟṟataṉai
   nallā riṭaippukku nāṇātu collittāṉ
   pullaṟivu kāṭṭi viṭum.
   The neophyte.
   Without any learning of his own, the fool has obtained one formula from
   overhearing the lessons of a tutor (who was teaching others ), yet
   unabashed he enters the circle of the good, speaks it out, and makes
   exhibition of his mean understanding.
   315. coṟpōr purivatai naṟpulavar viḻaiyār.
   veṉṟip poruṭṭāl vilaṅkottu meykoḷḷār
   kaṉṟik kaṟutteḻuntu kāyvārō —ṭoṉṟi
   uraivit takameḻuvār kāṇpavē, kaiyuḷ
   curaivittup pōluntam pal.
   Convincing arguments.
   They who arise to utter words of wisdom, having associated themselves
   with the assembly of those who rage and burn and fume with anger, like
   beasts, for the mere sake of victory, not understanding the truth,
   shall see their own teeth like pumpkin seeds in their hands!
   316. mūṭar moḻiyaiyum cāṉṟōr kēṭpar.
   pāṭamē ōtip payaṉterital tēṟṟāta
   mūṭar muṉitakka colluṅkāl — kēṭaruñcīrc
   cāṉṟōr camaḻttaṉar niṟpavē maṟṟavarai
   īṉṟāṭ ciṟappap parintu.
   Fools disgrace themselves in the assembly of the learned.
   When foolish men chant their lesson, not knowing the fruit that lesson
   yields, but uttering words that gender wrath, the learned ones, whose
   fame dies not, will stand by ashamed, sorely pitying the mother that
   bare them.
   317. nūṟporuḷ kāṇpatu yārkkum arumaiyām.
   peṟuvatu koḷpavar tōḷpōl neṟippaṭṭuk
   kaṟpavark kellām eḷiyanūl— maṟṟam
   muṟipurai mēṉiyaruḷḷampōṉ ṟiyārkkum
   aṟitaṟ kariya poruḷ.
   The letter easy, the meaning hard.
   Like the charms of those who sell their love for what they gain, the
   sacred texts are easy to those who rightly learn then; but like the
   minds of these whose forms are soft as tender shoots, the meaning is
   hard to all.
   318. puttakam tokuttōr ellārum pulavar allar.
   puttakamē cālat tokuttum poruḷteriyār
   uyttaka mellām niṟaippiṉum — maṟṟavaṟṟaip
   pōṟṟum pulavarum vēṟē poruḷterintu
   tēṟṟum pulavarum vēṟu.
   Book collectors and scholars.
   Although men gather together books in abundance, and, not understanding
   their contents, fill the whole house with them; the sages who merely
   take care of books are of one sort, and the sages who understand their
   contents, and make them clear to others, are of another sort.
   319. poruḷ viḷakkuvatē nūliṟku uraiyām.
   poḻippakalam nuṭpanūl eccamin nāṉkiṟ
   koḻittakalaṅ kāṭṭātār coṟkaḷ — paḻippil
   niraiyāmā cērkkum neṭuṅkuṉṟa nāṭa!
   uraiyāmō nūliṟku naṉku.
   A perfect commentary.
   Lord of the land of long chains of hills where the wild cattle assemble
   in herds!
   Is that a good commentary to a faultless composition, which consists of
   the words of those who do not sift it thoroughly, in the four divisions
   of summary, amplification, minute exposition, and supplementary
   information, and thus exhibit the full import?
   320. naṟkuṭippiṟappilār nallaṟivu aṭaiyār.
   iṟpiṟap pillār eṉaittunūl kaṟpiṉum
   coṟpiṟaraik kākkuṅ karuviyarō — iṟpiṟanta
   nallaṟivāḷar naviṉṟanūl tēṟṟātār
   pullaṟivu tāmaṟiva til.
   Critics.
   Will those who are not of high family, however they may study learned
   works, be fit instruments to guard others from faults of speech? And
   men of good family who are well learned will not (seem to) be aware of
   the deficiencies of those who do not comprehend the works they talk of.
   -------------

          33 . pullaṟivāṇmai / Ch. 33. Insufficient Knowledge

   321. pullaṟivuṭaiyār pulavar urai koḷḷār.
   aruḷiṉ aṟamuraikkum aṉpuṭaiyār vāyccol
   poruḷākak koḷvar pulavar — poruḷalla
   ēḻai ataṉai ikaḻnturaikkum pāṟkūḻai
   mūḻai cuvaiyuṇarā tāṅku.
   Only the wise value the wise.
   Men of sense receive as a reality the words from the mouth of the
   loving ones who graciously teach virtue. The (ignorant)wretch, himself
   unreal, speaks (of virtue) with contempt. Just so the ladle
   distinguishes not the flavour of the rice boiled in milk.
   322. aṟaneṟi kīḻmakkaḷ ceviyil ēṟātu.
   avviyam illār aṟattā ṟuraikkuṅkāl
   cevviya rallār cevikoṭuttuṅ kēṭkalār
   kavvittōl tiṉṉum kuṇuṅkarnāy pāṟcōṟṟiṉ
   cevvi koḷaltēṟṟā tāṅku.
   Foolish people hearing hear not.
   When men of ungrudging soul declare the way of virtue, those who are
   not rightly disposed, although they give ear, hear not. Even so the
   currier's dog seizes on and devours leather, not appreciating the
   flavour of milk and rice.
   323. naṉṟiyillātār poṉṟuvatu nalamē.
   imaikkum aḷaviltam iṉṉuyirpōm mārkkam
   eṉaittāṉum tāmkaṇṭiruntum — tiṉaittuṇaiyum
   naṉṟi purikallā nāṇil maṭamākkaḷ
   poṉṟileṉ poṉṉākkā leṉ.
   Useless in life and unmourned in death.
   What matters it whether they live or die—the shameless stupid people
   who do no good, not even as much as a grain of millet, though they see
   by every species of example the way in which their life so sweet to
   them, passes away in the twinkling of an eye?
   324. pallōr pakaikoḷal pullaṟivākum.
   uḷanāḷ cilavāl uyirkkēmam iṉṟāl
   palarmaṉṉun tūṟṟum paḻiyāl — palaruḷḷum
   kaṇṭārō ṭellām nakāa tevaṉoruvaṉ
   taṇṭit taṉippakai kōḷ.
   Misanthropy.
   Since being's days are few, and life no safeguardowns, and guilt by
   many blamed is rife, mid many men, why, laughing not with all they see,
   should any sulk apart, and nurse a sullen hate ?
   325. avaiyil evaraiyum vaivatu koṭiyatu.
   eyti yirunta avai muṉṉarc ceṉṟeḷḷi
   vaitā ṉoruvaṉ oruvaṉai — vaiyam
   vayappaṭṭāṉ vāḷā iruppāṉēl vaitāṉ
   viyattakkāṉ vāḻu meṉiṉ.
   The evil tongue.
   A man has gone before the assembly that had gathered together, and
   contemning another has reviled him. Now if the reviled one remain
   silent, the reviler is to be wondered at if he survive; (for abuse is
   his very life, and the patience of the reviled one has closed his
   mouth.)
   326. aṟacceyal puriyāṉ ciṟappiṉai aṭaiyāṉ.
   mūppumēl vārāmai muṉṉē aṟaviṉaiyai
   ūkki ataṉkaṇ muyalātāṉ — nūkkip
   puṟattiru pōkeṉṉum iṉṉāccol illuḷ
   toḻuttaiyāṟ kūṟap paṭum.
   Dishonoured old age.
   He who before old age comes, has not undertaken and zealously carried
   out works of virtue, will be pushed about in the house addressed in
   harsh language, and bidden to get on one side or to go out, by even the
   maid-servants.
   327. pullaṟivu vīṇiṟ poḻutupōkkuvatē.
   tāmēyum iṉpuṟār takkārkkum naṉṟāṟṟār
   ēmañcār naṉṉeṟiyuñ cērkalār — tāmayaṅki
   ākkattuḷ tūṅki avattamē vāḻnāḷaip
   pōkkuvār pullaṟivi ṉār.
   Wasted lives.
   Men of scanty wisdom are those who do not themselves enjoy any sweets
   of life, bestow no benefactions on worthy persons, draw not nigh the
   good path that safeguards (the soul), but infatuated and absorbed in
   the acquisition of wealth, pass away their days of life in vain.
   328. pētaiyār aṟacceyal piṉceya niṉaippār.
   ciṟukālai yētamakkuc celvuḻi valci
   iṟukiṟukat tōṭkōppuk koḷḷār — iṟukiṟukip
   piṉṉaṟivām eṉṟirukkum pētaiyār kaikāṭṭum
   poṉṉum puḷiviḷaṅkā yām.
   The miser's death-bed.
   In the very earliest time (in early youth) they take not food for the
   journey which they must make (into another world), tying tightly the
   wallet on their shoulders ; but tying tightly (their treasure bags),
   they say, 'In after days we will learn wisdom;' the gold these idiots
   will indict with their hands (as legacies, when they are speechless,
   and in the grasp of death) will be as sour vilam fruit.
   329. ciṟanta vāḻvil aṟampurivatu mēl.
   veṟumai yiṭattum viḻuppiṇip pōḻtum
   maṟumai maṉattārē yāki — maṟumaiyai
   aintai yaṉaittāṉum āṟṟiya kālattuc
   cintiyār ciṟṟaṟivi ṉār.
   Saints when they suffer, sinners when they prosper.
   When poor, or when disease's deadly grasp they feel, to other world
   alone their minds are given ; but when wealth grows, no thought, small
   as a grain of mustard seed, give they to other world —these souls
   unwise!
   330. nilaiyilā vāḻviṉai niṉaintu aṟampurika.
   eṉṉēmaṟ ṟavvuṭampu peṟṟum aṟamniṉaiyār
   koṉṉē kaḻippartam vāḻnāḷai — aṉṉō
   aḷaviṟanta kātaltam āruyi raṉṉārk
   koḷaiḻaikkuṅ kūṟṟamuṅ kaṇṭu.
   Friends hurried away; the unwise heed it not.
   Though they have gained a human frame, of virtue think they not! In
   vain they spent their days. Alas! and yet they see death eagerly
   hasting to snatch away those infinitely dear, like to their very souls!
   Why is this so?
   -------------

                    34 . pētaimai / Ch. 34. Utter Folly

   331. iṟappai eṇṇātu kaḷittiruttal pētaimai.
   kolaiñar ulaiyēṟṟit tīmaṭuppa āmai
   nilaiyaṟiyā tannīr paṭintāṭi yaṟṟē
   kolaival peruṅkūṟṟam kōḷpārppa īṇṭai
   valaiyakattuc cemmāppār māṇpu.
   Men disport themselves in the very meshes of death's net.
   While the turtle's murderers have put it into the pot, and kindled fire
   beneath, it sports unconscious of its fate: such is their worth who joy
   entangled in life's not, while death, the mighty murderer, waits to
   seize them.
   332. nāḷum aṟaviṉai ceyvatu naṉṟu.
   peruṅkaṭalāṭiya ceṉṟār oruṅkuṭaṉ
   ōcai avintapiṉ āṭutum eṉṟaṟṟāl
   iṟcey kuṟaiviṉai nīkki aṟaviṉai
   maṟṟaṟivām eṉṟiruppār māṇpu.
   Postponing virtuous action to a time that never arrives.
   They went to bathe in the great sea, but cried 'we will wait till all
   its roar is hushed, then bathe!' Such is their worth who say, 'we will
   get rid of all our household toils and cares and then we will practise
   virtue and be wise.'
   333. muttikku uriya aṟattai muṉpurika.
   kulamtavam kalvi kuṭimaimūp paintum
   vilaṅkāmal eytiyak kaṇṇum — nalañcāṉṟa
   maiyaṟu tolcīr ulakam aṟiyāmai
   neyyilāp pāṟcōṟṟiṉ nēr.
   A high tone of manners and morals.
   Though a man be of good caste, have performed deeds of ascetic virtue,
   acquired learning, is of good family and attained a ripe old age, so
   that in these five points he is faultless; yet his ignorance of what is
   thoroughly good, without stain, sanctioned by ancient precedent, and of
   good renown in the world's ways, will render all his advantages like
   thin, watery milk with boiled rice.
   334. kaṭaiyāya mākkaḷiṟ kallē payaṉtarum.
   kalnaṉi nalla kaṭaiyāya mākkaḷiṉ
   colnaṉi tāmuṇarā vāyiṉum — iṉṉiṉiyē
   niṟṟal iruttal kiṭattal iyaṅkutaleṉ
   muṟṟavarkkut tāmutava lāṉ.
   Stones and senseless men.
   Stones are much better than low men ; since, though those (too) are
   utterly without apprehension of your words, yet they (stones) are of
   assistance to those that employ them, inasmuch as they at once stand
   (where they are fixed), remain (where they are put), lie (where they
   are laid), and remove (when they are moved).
   335. pētaiyar nākkut tīyacoṟ pēcum.
   peṟuvatoṉ ṟiṉṟiyum peṟṟāṉē pōlak
   kaṟuvukoṇ ṭēlātār māṭṭum — kaṟuviṉāl
   kōttiṉṉā kūṟi uraiyākkāṟ pētaikku
   nāttiṉṉum nalla cuṉaittu.
   A fool angry without cause, longs to abuse.
   If the fool, though nothing is to be gained (by such conduct), acting
   as though he had gained something, waxing wroth against those who
   disdain (or are unable) to contend with him, cannot say and utter forth
   in his wrath a string of evil words a grievous itching will gnaw his
   tongue.
   336. mētaiyar tiruttiṉum pētaiyar tiruntār.
   taṅkaṇ marapillār piṉceṉṟu tāmavarai
   eṅkaṇ vaṇakkutu meṉpavar — puṉkēṇmai
   naṟṟaḷirp puṉṉai malaruṅ kaṭaṟcērppa
   kaṟkiḷḷik kaiyiḻan taṟṟu.
   It is a hard thankless task to bend the worthless to our will.
   Lord of the sea-shore where the laurel with its bright foliage flowers!
   The poor (pretence of) intimacy enjoyed by those who follow after
   (wealthy but) utterly uncongenial men, and say 'we will bend them to
   our will,' is like loosing one's hand while digging into a rock.
   337. celvaraic cūḻntē tirivar pētaiyar.
   ākā teṉiṉum akattuney uṇṭākiṉ
   pōkā teṟumpu puṟañcuṟṟum — yātuṅ
   koṭā areṉiṉum uṭaiyāraip paṟṟi
   viṭāar ulakat tavar.
   Ants around the neck of the closed oil-jar.
   If there be ghi in the pot, though they cannot get at it, the ants will
   swarm without ceasing around the outside ; and so the people of the
   world will cling to and not leave the possessors of wealth, though
   these give them nothing.
   338. nalam ceyyā vāḻkkaiyum nāṭuvar aṟivilār.
   nallavai nāṭoṟum eytār aṟañceyyār
   illātārk kiyātoṉṟum īkalār — ellām
   iṉiyārtōḷ cērār icaipaṭa vāḻār
   muṉiyārkol tāmvāḻum nāḷ.
   Fools make all life sad for themselves.
   No good each day they gain; nor deed of virtue do; nothing to needy men
   impart; nor know they joy of loved ones' sweet embrace ; devoid of fame
   they live: do such not loathe the days they live?
   339. virumpiṉōr kēṇmai virumpuvar aṟiñar.
   viḻaintoruvar tammai viyappa oruvar
   viḻaintilēm eṉṟirukkum kēṇmai — taḻaṅkukural
   pāytiraicūḻ vaiyam payappiṉum iṉṉātē
   āynalam illātār māṭṭu.
   Friendship without reciprocity.
   Friendship with those who are destitute of exquisite goodness, and who,
   though you cultivate them with affectionate deference, (morosely) say
   we entertain affection for none,'—though it should yield as its fruit
   the earth, which the sea with its noisy chime of leaping billows girds
   around,—would be only affliction.
   340. tampukaḻ tāmē kūṟiṉ iḻivām.
   kaṟṟaṉavum kaṇṇakaṉṟa cāyalum iṟpiṟappum
   pakkattār pārāṭṭap pāṭeytum; —tāṉuraippiṉ
   maittuṉar palki maruntiṉ taṇiyāta
   pittaṉeṉ ṟeḷḷap paṭum.
   Self-laudation.
   The learning a man has acquired, his world - renowned excellence, and
   his nobility of birth, will gain for him respect when the bystanders
   celebrate them; but if he himself proclaim them, the young kinsmen
   crowding around will deride him as one afflicted with a mania not to be
   mitigated by any medicine.
   -----------

                       35. kīḻmai / Ch. 35. Lowness

   341. aṟiñar aṟavurai kēḷār kīḻōr.
   kappi kaṭavatāk kālaittaṉ vāyppeyiṉum
   kuppai kiḷaippōvāk kōḻipōl — mikka
   kaṉampotinta nūlvirittuk kāṭṭiṉum kīḻtaṉ
   maṉampurinta vāṟē mikum.
   Teaching wasted.
   The fowl, though each morning duly you scatter broken grain into its
   very mouth, will ceaselessly scratch in the refuse-heap; so, though you
   expound and show the base man works of learning, full of weighty
   wisdom, he will but the more resolutely go on in the way in which his
   mind finds delight.
   342. mēlōr iṭattiṟ kīḻōr aṇukār.
   kāḻāya koṇṭu kacaṭaṟṟār tañcāral
   tāḻātu pōvām eṉauraippiṉ—kīḻtāṉ
   uṟaṅkuvām eṉṟeḻuntu pōmāmaḵ taṉṟi
   maṟaṅkumām maṟṟoṉ ṟuraittu.
   The base will not seek the company of the wise and good.
   If you say to the base man, ‘Let us without delay go to seek refuge
   with faultless sages possessors of mature wisdom,' he will probably get
   up and make off, exclaiming, 'Let us go and slumber,!’ or he will
   perhaps demur, and change the subject.
   343. kīḻmakkaḷ celvattiṉum mēṉmaippaṇpu aṟiyār.
   perunaṭai tāmpeṟiṉum peṟṟi piḻaiyā
   toruṭaiya rākuvar cāṉṟōr — perunaṭai
   peṟṟak kaṭaittum piṟaṅkaruvi naṉṉāṭa!
   vaṟṟām orunaṭai kīḻ.
   Promotion does not spoil the good nor improve the bad
   Lord of the goodly land of swelling torrents! If thoroughly worthy men
   gain some added dignity, their nature knows no deviation, but they go
   on in the same even path of virtue ; and although the base obtain
   promotion, his conduct too changes not, (promotion betters him not.)
   344. tiṉaittaṉai naṉṟiyum niṉaippar cāṉṟōr.
   tiṉaiyaṉaittē yāyiṉum ceytanaṉ ṟuṇṭāl
   paṉaiyaṉaittā uḷḷuvar cāṉṟōr — paṉaiyaṉait(tu)
   eṉṟuñ ceyiṉum ilaṅkaruvi naṉṉāṭa!
   naṉṟila naṉṟaṟiyār māṭṭu.
   Small benefits seem great to the wise ; and vice versa.
   Lord of the goodly land of glistening torrents ! The excellent will
   deem any favour done them, though small as a grain of millet, to be
   large as a palm tree. You may constantly confer favours huge as a palm
   tree, but they are not benefits, when conferred on those who are not
   grateful.
   345. perumaic ceyalkaḷ puriyār kīḻōr.
   poṟkalat tūṭṭip puṟantariṉum nāypiṟar
   ecciṟ kimaiyātu pārttirukkum — accīr
   perumai yuṭaittāk koḷiṉumkīḻ ceyyuḷ
   karumaṅkaḷ vēṟu paṭum.
   The dog prefers to feed on refuse. Nature will out!
   The dog, though you tend it with care, feeding it from a golden vessel,
   will watch, eye fixed for others' leavings ; even so, although you
   receive the base as if they were possessed of greatness, the deeds they
   do will be otherwise (= their real character will be seen by their
   conduct).
   346. kīḻmakaṉ taṉṉai mēleṉa eṇṇuvāṉ.
   cakkarac celvam peṟiṉum viḻumiyōr
   ekkāluñ collār mikuticcol — ekkālum
   muntirimēṟ kāṇi mikuvatēl kīḻtaṉṉai
   intiraṉā eṇṇi viṭum.
   The base intoxicated by some trivial gain.
   Though they obtain imperial wealth, the excellent never utter a
   vaunting word ; but if at any time the base see some small fraction
   added to his scanty store, he will deem himself great as Indra.
   347. ceyyun toḻilāṟ ciṟiyavarai aṟiyalām.
   maitīr pacumpoṉmēl māṇṭa maṇiyaḻuttic
   ceyta teṉiṉum cerupputtaṉ kāṟkēyām
   eytiya celvatta rāyiṉum kīḻkaḷaic
   ceytoḻilāṟ kāṇap paṭum
   The slipper.
   Though made of faultless yellow gold, enwrought with choicest pearls,
   the slipper serves but for one's foot; though the base be deemed
   prosperous through the wealth they have gained, their baseness will be
   seen by their actions.
   348. tuṉpam viḷaikkum kīḻmakkaḷ toḻilkaḷ.
   kaṭukkeṉac colvaṟṟām kaṇṇōṭṭa miṉṟām
   iṭukkaṇ piṟarmāṭ ṭuvakkum — aṭuttaṭuttu
   vēka muṭaittām viṟaṉmalai naṉṉāṭa!
   ēkumām eḷḷumām kīḻ.
   The base man's habit of life. Victorious lord of the good mountain
   land! The base is mighty in bitter words, is destitute of kindliness,
   rejoices in others' sorrows, is ever and anon full of sudden wrath,
   will run up and down and pour contempt on all he meets.
   349. paṉṉāṭ piṉceliṉ kīḻmakkaḷ paḻippār.
   paḻaiya rivareṉṟu paṉṉāṭpiṉ niṟpiṉ
   uḻaiiṉiya rākuvar cāṉṟōr—viḻaiyātē
   kaḷḷuyirkkum neytaṟ kaṉaikaṭal taṇcērppa!
   eḷḷuvar kīḻā yavar.
   No intimacy possible with the base.
   Lord of the resounding sea's cool shore, where the Neythal breathes
   honied fragrance round! The worthy, if men for many days stand waiting
   in their train will say 'these are old acquaintance,' and will make the
   place pleasant to them; the base in such circumstances feel no
   affection, but simply despise them.
   350. celvattilum kīḻmakkaṉ ceyyār nalviṉai.
   koypul koṭuttuk kuṟaitteṉṟun tīṟṟiṉum
   vaiyampūṇ kallā ciṟukuṇṭai — aiyakēḷ!
   eytiya celvatta rāyiṉum kīḻkaḷaic
   ceytoḻilāṟ kāṇap paṭum.
   Prosperity does not elevate the base.
   Hear, O Sir! The little bullock-calves will not learn to bear the yoke
   and draw the chariot, though you give them cut grass, clip them, and
   constantly rub them down; so, though they have gained wealth, the base
   will be seen (to be so) by the deeds they do.
   -----------------

                        36. kayamai /Ch. 36. Baseness

   351. tīya toḻilaiyē ceyvar kayavar.
   ārtta aṟiviṉar āṇṭiḷaiya rāyiṉum
   kāttōmpit tammai aṭakkupa — mūttoṟūum
   tīttoḻilē kaṉṟit tiritan teruvaipōl
   pōttaṟār pullaṟivi ṉār.
   Age does not improve the essentially base.
   The thoroughly wise, though young in years, will guard themselves in
   stern self-repression. The low unwise as age comes on become mature in
   evil works, and are like reeds wind-shaken, hollow still!
   352. kayavar nūlkaṟpiṉum nuṇṇaṟivu naṇṇār.
   ceḻumperum poykaiyuḷ vāḻiṉum eṉṟum
   vaḻumpaṟukka killāvām tērai — vaḻumpilcīr
   nūlkaṟṟak kaṇṇum nuṇukkamoṉ ṟillātār
   tērkiṟkum peṟṟi aritu.
   Fine perception unattainable by the obtuse.
   Though frogs flourish long in a rich large lake, they never rid
   themselves of their slime; so it is hard for those void of fine
   perception, even when they have learned pure and excellent text-books,
   to acquire the gift of clear understanding.
   353. muṉniṉṟu evarkuṟṟamum moḻivār kayavar.
   kaṇamalai naṉṉāṭa! kaṇ iṉ ṟoruvar
   kuṇaṉēyuṅ kūṟaṟ karitāl — kuṇaṉaḻuṅkak
   kuṟṟam uḻainiṉṟu kūṟuñ ciṟiyavarkaṭ
   keṟṟāl iyaṉṟatō nā.
   Detraction easy only to the base.
   Lord of the goodly land of mountain chains ! It is hard to stand before
   a man, and publish even his praise. How then can mean men's tongues
   depreciate a man's good qualities and proclaim his faults while
   standing before him?.
   354. kayavar tam matippaik kāṭṭiyē naṭappār.
   kōṭēn takalalkuṟ peṇṭirtam peṇṇirmai
   cēṭiyar pōlac ceyaltēṟṟār — kūṭip
   putupperukkam pōlattam peṇṇīrmai kāṭṭi
   matittiṟappar maṟṟai yavar.
   Base men vaunt themselves like wantons.
   Chaste women trick not out their charms of womanhood, as is as the wont
   of the wanton. Like fountains ever fresh those others make display of
   every charm, and vaunt their beauty as they pass.
   355. kayavar varuttiṉōrkkup payaṉ taruvar.
   taḷirmēlē niṟpiṉum taṭṭāmaṟ cellā
   uḷi nīrār mātō kayavar — aḷinīrārk
   keṉṉāṉuñ ceyyār eṉaittāṉuñ ceypavē
   iṉṉāṅku ceyvārp peṟiṉ.
   You must extort from the base what you want.
   The base are like the chisel, that, though it is over the bud (to be
   sculptured), moves not without some one to strike it. On those who are
   courteous these confer no boon whatever. They will do everything for
   those who use violent means.
   356. taṉaippiṟar vaittatai niṉaippāṉ kayavaṉ.
   malainalam uḷḷum kuṟavaṉ ; payanta
   viḷainilam uḷḷum uḻavaṉ ; ciṟantoruvar
   ceytanaṉ ṟuḷḷuvar cāṉṟōr ; kayamtaṉṉai
   vaitatai uḷḷi viṭum.
   Each thinks upon his own favourite place. The good remember only
   benefits conferred on them ; the bad only injuries.
   The hill-man thinks upon the beauty of his hills; the farmer thinks
   upon his fields that have yielded him rich crops; the good think on the
   boons bestowed by worthy men; the base man's thoughts are fixed on
   abuse he has received.
   357. ettuṇai naṉṟiyum eṇṇāṉ kīḻmakaṉ.
   orunaṉṟi ceytavark koṉṟi yeḻunta
   piḻainūṟum cāṉṟōr poṟuppar — kayavark
   keḻunūṟu naṉṟicey toṉṟutī tāyiṉ
   eḻunūṟum tītāy viṭum.
   The good are grateful; the base ungrateful and malignant.
   The good attach themselves to those that have done them one act of
   kindness, and forgive a hundred wrongs that arise. The base receive
   seven hundred benefits, but one wrong will turn them all to evil.
   358. nallōr taḷarviṉum naṟceyal purivār.
   ēṭṭaip paruvattum iṟpiṟantār ceyvaṉa
   mōṭṭiṭattum ceyyār muḻumakkaḷ — kōṭṭai
   vayiram ceṟippiṉum vāṭkaṇṇāy! paṉṟi
   ceyirvēḻa mākutal iṉṟu.
   Base men illiberal even in prosperity.
   Worthless persons even in high estate do not the deeds that men of
   noble birth perform even in their poverty. Okeen-eyed maid! Men may
   enring and arm the boar's tusks, but it will not even so become a
   warlike elephant.
   359. kayavar maraiyilaipōṟ payaṉiṉṟi māyvar.
   iṉṟātum innilaiyē ātum iṉicciṟitu
   niṉṟatum eṉṟu niṉaittiruntu — oṉṟi
   uraiyiṉ makiḻntu tam uḷḷamvēṟāki
   maraiyilaiyiṉ māyntār palar.
   Vain dreams. We fade as a leaf.
   ‘To-day, at once, a little hence, we shall gain our end!’ So many speak
   and think, and joyously tell it out among their friends ; but soon
   their eager minds are changed; and they have perished like a lotus
   leaf.
   360. kalneñcar celvakkālattilum kayavar.
   nīruṭ piṟantu niṟampaciya tāyiṉum
   īram kiṭaiyākat tillākum — ōrum
   niṟaipperuñ celvattu niṉṟak kaṭaittum
   aṟaipperuṅkal aṉṉār uṭaittu.
   Wealth without heart.
   Though born in the water, and its hue appear green, the Netti's pith
   knows no moisture; so in the world are men of amplest wealth whose
   hearts are hard as stones upon the rocky mountain fell.
   -------------

              37. paṉṉeṟi / Ch. 37. Miscellaneous Topics.

   361. kaṟpuṭaiya peṇ illā vīṭu kāṭām.
   maḻaitiḷaikkum māṭamāy māṇpamainta kāppāy
   iḻaiviḷakku niṉṟimaippiṉ eṉṉām — viḻaitakka
   māṇṭa maṉaiyāḷai yillātāṉ illakam
   kāṇṭaṟ kariyatōr kāṭu.
   The wife.
   The mansion meets the clouds. A stately band of warders keep watch
   around. Gems glisten therein like lamps. What then? Where the owner has
   not a wife of dainty excellence: the house within is a waste, hard to
   explore.
   362. maṅkaiyar kaṟpiṉ niṟpatu māṇpu
   vaḻukkeṉaittum illāta vāḷvāyk kiṭantum
   iḻukkiṉait tāmpeṟuva rāyiṉ — iḻukkeṉaittuñ
   ceykuṟāp pāṇi ciṟitēac ciṉmoḻiyār
   kaiyuṟāp pāṇi peritu.
   Outward guards avail nothing.
   Though compassed round with a faultless guard of swords, ifonce they
   gain freedom, in little time they are stained with every fault; and
   long is the time those soft-voiced once spurn every law of right
   363. kaṟpilā makaḷir kaṇavaṟkuk kūṟṟam.
   eṟiyeṉ ṟetirniṟpāḷ kūṟṟam ; ciṟukālai
   aṭṭil pukātāḷ arumpiṇi;— aṭṭataṉai
   uṇṭi utavātāḷ ilvāḻpēy : immūvar
   koṇṭāṉaik kollum paṭai.
   The evil qualities of a bad wife and their effects.
   Death is the wife that stands and dares her spouse to strike! Disease
   is she who enters not the kitchen betimes! Demon domestic is she who
   cooks and gives no alms! These three are swords to slay their lords !
   364. peṇṭirait tuṟavā tiruppatu pētaimai.
   kaṭiyeṉak kēṭṭuṅ kaṭiyāṉ veṭipaṭa
   ārppatu kēṭṭum atuteḷiyāṉ — pērttumōr
   iṟkoṇ ṭiṉitirūum ēmuṟutal eṉpavē
   kaṟkoṇ ṭeṟiyun tavaṟu.
   The second marriage.
   He hears (that marriage is another name for) dread, and yet he dreads
   it not! He hears the fearful funeral drum, but it gives him no sense !
   Again to take a wife and to dwell bewildered amidst domestic enjoyments
   is a fault that merits stoning; sosay (the wise).
   365. tavam ceyvatu talaimai vāḻvu.
   talaiyē tavammuyaṉṟu vāḻtal ; oruvark
   kiṭaiyē iṉiyārkaṇ taṅkal ; —kaṭaiyē
   puṇarāteṉ ṟeṇṇip poruḷnacaiyāl tammai
   uṇarārpiṉ ceṉṟu nilai.
   Different modes of life.
   The best thing is a life spent in penitential practices. The middle
   course is to live with dear ones around. The worst of all is, with the
   thought that we have not enough, through desire of wealth subserviently
   to follow those who understand us not.
   366. uyarntōr palanūl uṇarntunāḷ kaḻippar.
   kallāk kaḻippar talaiyāyār; nallavai
   tuvvāk kaḻippar iṭaikaḷ ; kaṭaikaḷ
   iṉituṇṇēm ārap peṟēmyāma eṉṉum
   muṉiviṉāṟ kaṇpā ṭilar.
   Three kinds of men; those that learn, those that enjoy, and those that
   complain. The men of noblest mood pass their time in learning. The
   middle sort pass their time in the enjoyment of good things. The last
   and lowest cry : 'Our food is not sweet,' 'We've not got our fill,' and
   in angry mood lie sleepless.
   367. tantai yaṟivē maintaṉ aṟivām.
   cennellā lāya ceḻumuḷai maṟṟumac
   cennellē yāki viḷaitalāl — annel
   vayalniṟaiyak kāykkum vaḷavaya lūra!
   makaṉaṟivu tantai yaṟivu.
   Like father, like son! The red grain's swelling germ in after time
   grows up and yields that same red grain.— O fertile crofted village
   lord, whose fields are filled with ripening crops of that same grain
   !—Wisdom of son is wisdom of the sire.
   368. kīḻmēlāka mēlkīḻāka vāḻvar ulakil.
   uṭaipperuñ celvarum cāṉṟōrum keṭṭup
   puṭaippeṇṭir makkaḷum kīḻum perukik
   kaṭaikkāl talaikkaṇṇa tākik kuṭaikkālpōṟ
   kīḻmēlāy niṟkum ulaku.
   Bad times.
   The wealthy men of great possessions and the perfect have perished,
   while wantons' sons and base men multiply. The lowest takes chief
   place, and, like the umbrella's handle, this world is upside down!
   369. aṉpar kuṟainīkkāta vāḻvu naṉṟaṉṟu.
   iṉiyārtam neñcattu nōyuraippa annōy
   taṇiyāta uḷḷam uṭaiyār — maṇivaraṉṟi
   viḻum aruvi viṟaṉmalai naṉṉāṭa!
   vāḻviṉ varaipāytal naṉṟu.
   Misery of unfeeling selfishness.
   Lord of the good land of mighty hills whence streams descend sweeping
   along pearls!
   Better men should jump down a precipice than live with a mind not
   disposed to assuage the pain of the dear ones who tell them of their
   heart's pain.
   370. veḷḷam pōṉṟatu vēcaiyar naṭpu.
   putuppuṉalum pūṅkuḻaiyār naṭpum iraṇṭum
   vituppaṟa nāṭiṉvēṟalla — putuppuṉalum
   māri aṟavē aṟumē, avaraṉpum
   vāri aṟavē aṟum.
   The wantons' love.
   ‘The mountain freshed, and the love of those adorned
   With pendant jewels rare examined calmly prove
   To differ nought: that fails when rains that feed it fail;
   And love of these fails too, when income fails !’
   ------------

                     38. potumakaḷir / Ch. 38. Wantons

   371. viḷakkiṉ oḷipōṉṟatu vēcaiyar naṭpu.
   viḷakkoḷiyum vēcaiyar naṭpum iraṇṭum
   tuḷakkaṟa nāṭiṉ vēṟalla — viḷakkoḷiyum
   neyyaṟṟa kaṇṇē aṟumē, avaraṉpum
   kaiyaṟṟa kaṇṇē aṟum.
   The wantons' mercenary character.
   The lamp's light and harlot's love examined well are seen to differ not
   a whit; the lamp's light goes out when the feeding oil is consumed !
   and the harlot's love is spent when the lavish hand has spent its
   wealth.
   372. potuppeṇṭir aṉpu poyyaṉpu ākum.
   aṅkōṭ ṭakalalkul āyiḻaiyāḷ nammōṭu
   ceṅkōṭu pāytumē eṉṟāḷmaṉ — ceṅkōṭṭiṉ
   mēṟkāṇa miṉmaiyāṉ mēvā toḻintāḷē
   kāṟkālnōy kāṭṭik kaluḻntu.
   The wanton's self-interested professions.
   She (of enticing beauty), adorned with choice jewels, said forsooth, 'I
   will leap with you down the steep precipice;' but on the very brow of
   the precipice, because I had no money, she, weeping and pointing to her
   aching feet, withdrew and left me alone!
   373. poruḷilātavaraip pōkkuvar parattaiyar.
   aṅkaṇ vicumpiṉ amarar toḻappaṭum
   ceṅkaṇmā lāyiṉum ākamaṉ — tamkaik
   koṭuppatoṉ ṟillāraik koytaḷi raṉṉār
   viṭuppartam kaiyāl toḻutu.
   Courtezans forsake those who have no wealth.
   Though he be Mal, the fiery-eyed, whom in the heaven's fair homes
   immortals worship, if in hand he bring no gift the women tender as the
   buds men cull, will straight dismiss him, bowing low with folded hands.
   374. pulaiyaṉum poruḷtariṉ vilaimakaḷ puṇarvaṉ.
   āṇamil neñcat taṇinīlak kaṇṇārkkuk
   kāṇa milātār kaṭuvaṉaiyar — kāṇavē
   cekkūrntu koṇṭārum ceyta poruḷuṭaiyār
   akkāram aṉṉār avarkku.
   Money makes a man the wanton's darling.
   To the damsels of loveless hearts, whose eyes are as beauteous as blue
   water-lilies, those who have no wealth are as poison! Even those who
   have turned the (oil) press, in sight of all men, if they have wealth,
   are as sugar to them.
   375. veḷḷaṟivu uṭaiyavar virumpuvar vēcaiyai.
   pāmpiṟ korutalai kāṭṭi orutalai
   tēmpaṭu teṇkayattu mīṉ kāṭṭum — āṅku
   malaṅkaṉṉa ceykai makaḷirtōḷ cērvār
   vilaṅkaṉṉa veḷḷaṟivi ṉār.
   Wantons and their paramours.
   The silly ones, who are as beasts, seek the embraces of women who are
   like the eel, which shows one head to the snake, and another head to
   the fish, in the sweet clear lake : (are of a double and deceitful
   nature).
   376. parattai col nampiṉōr paḻikkappaṭuvār.
   pottanūṟ kallum puṇarpiriyā aṉṟilumpōl
   nittalum nammaip piriyalam eṉṟuraitta
   poṟṟoṭiyum pērttakarkkō ṭāyiṉāḷ naṉṉeñcē
   niṟṟiyō pōtiyō nī.
   Feigned love becomes open hostility.
   ‘We will never part, like the precious stone strung on its thread, or
   the Andril,' said the damsel with golden bracelets: she has now become
   the horn of a fighting ram (she angrily repels me). Dear heart! dost
   linger still, or wilt thou go?
   377. nakaikkappaṭuvār vēcaiyai nampiṉōr.
   āmāpōl nakki avarkaip poruḷkoṇṭu
   cēmāpōl kuppuṟūum cillaikkaṇ aṉpiṉai
   ēmān temateṉṟiruntār peṟupavē
   tāmām palarāl nakai.
   Ridiculous infatuation of the wanton's dupe.
   Those who fondly reckon upon the devoted love of the worthless wanton,
   that, like the wild ox, licks the hand and despoils men of their
   wealth, and then, like the buffalo, bounds away, shall suffer the
   deserved ridicule of many.
   378. naṉṉeṟi vāḻkkaiyar vilaimakaḷai nāṭār.
   ēmānta pōḻtiṉ iṉiyārpōṉ ṟiṉṉārāyt
   tāmārnta pōtē takarkkōṭām — māṉnōkkiṉ
   tanneṟip peṇṭir taṭamulai cērārē
   cenneṟic cērttumeṉ pār.
   Bought embraces.
   Those whose avowed purpose it is to walk in the way of rectitude seek
   not the embrace of the fascinating, fawn-eyed damsels, who walk in a
   way of their own' who are pleasant when gratified with gifts, and when
   they are filled( =when no more gifts are to be expected) are like the
   horn of the fighting ram.
   379. poruṭpeṇṭir evarkkum urimaiyar allar.
   ūṟucey neñcamtam uḷḷaṭakki oṇṇutalār
   tēṟa moḻinta moḻikēṭṭut — tēṟi
   emareṉṟu koḷvāruṅ koḷpavē yārkkum
   tamarallar tamuṭampi ṉār.
   Let him be deceived that will.
   Let those accept (wantons' false love), who take them as their own
   believing the words uttered to inspire belief, by the bright-browed
   ones, who keep concealed within the cruelty that lurks in their heart.
   Those whose bodies are their sole wealth belong to none, (i. e. they
   have no souls to give!).
   380. pāvam niṟaintavar parattaiyar vacattar.
   uḷḷam oruvaṉ uḻaiyatā oṇṇutalār
   kaḷḷattāl ceyyuṅ karuttellām — teḷḷi
   aṟinta viṭattum aṟiyārām pāvam
   ceṟinta uṭampi ṉavar.
   Lust blinds men.
   Though the dupes clearly discern and know the guileful intentions
   entertained by the bright browed ones, even where their minds are
   (apparently) set upon some persons, they whose bodies are full of sin
   do not recognise it!
   ---------

           39 . kaṟpuṭai makaḷir / Ch. 39. Chaste Matronhood

   381. ayalavar mayalkoṉa aṇiyār makaḷir.
   arumpeṟaṟ kaṟpiṉ ayirāṇi yaṉṉa
   perum peyarp peṇṭi reṉiṉum — virumpi
   peṟunacaiyāṟ piṉniṟpāriṉmaiyē pēṇum
   naṟunutalāḷ naṉmait tuṇai.
   Freedom from temptation.
   Though women live famed as Ayirani for rarest gift of chastity, absence
   of men that stand enamoured of their charms is a help in way of good to
   those of fragrant brow who guard themselves.
   382. vaṟumaiyiṉum viruntōmpuvār maṅkaiyar.
   kuṭanīraṭ ṭuṇṇum iṭukkaṭ poḻutum
   kaṭalnīr aṟavuṇṇum kēḷir variṉum
   kaṭaṉnīrmai kaiyāṟāk koḷḷum maṭamoḻi
   mātar maṉaimāṭci yāḷ.
   A true wife, in time of poverty, if friends come in enough to drink up
   the sea, performs
   her duties with kindness of speech.
   When in the straitened time they cook and eat with but one pot of water
   on the hearth,— if relatives arrive enough to drain the sea, the
   soft-voiced dame, the glory of her home, well fulfils each seemly duty.
   383. kaṟpuṭaimaṅkaivāḻ iṟciṟappuk kāṇka.
   nālāṟum āṟāy naṉiciṟitāy eppuṟaṉum
   mēlāṟu mēluṟai cōriṉum — mēlāya
   vallāḷāy vāḻumūr taṟpukaḻum māṇkaṟpiṉ
   illāḷ amarntatē il.
   The real home!
   On every side the narrow dwelling lies open, on every part the rain
   drips down; yet, if the dame has noble gifts, praised by townsfolk for
   her modest worth, such a housewife's blest abode is indeed a home!
   384. kaṇavaṉai makiḻvippavaḷ kaṟpuṭaip peṇ.
   kaṭkiṉiyāḷ kātalaṉ kātal vakaipuṉaivāḷ
   uṭkuṭaiyāḷ ūrnāṇ iyalpiṉāḷ — uṭki
   iṭaṉaṟin tūṭi iṉitiṉ uṇarum
   maṭamoḻi mātarāḷ peṇ.
   The wife : 'placens uxor.'
   She is sweet to the eye, and adorned in the way that a lover loves; she
   enforces awe: her virtue shames the village folk; she is submissive;
   but in fitting place is stern, yet sweetly relents :—such a soft-voiced
   dame is a wife.
   385. nāṇuṭaiyavarē pēṇuvār kaṟpiṉai.
   eññāṉṟum emkaṇavar emtōḷmēṟ cērnteḻiṉum
   aññāṉṟu kaṇṭēmpōl nāṇutumāl — eññāṉṟum
   eṉṉai keḻīiyiṉar kollō poruḷnacaiyāl
   paṉmārpu cērntoḻuku vār.
   The modest woman cannot understand shamelessness.
   ‘Whenever our spouse takes us in his embrace, we feel a timid shame as
   if we saw him then for the first time and they (wantons) daily, through
   desire of gain, submit to the embraces of many! How can this be?'
   386. nāṇmutal nāṟkuṇam nallārkku aṇikalaṉ.
   uḷḷat tuṇarvuṭaiyāṉ ōtiya nūlaṟṟāl
   vaḷḷaṉmai pūṇṭāṉkaṇ oṇporuḷ — teḷḷiya
   āṇmakaṉ kaiyil ayilvā ḷaṉaittarō
   nāṇuṭaiyāḷ peṟṟa nalam.
   A modest wife like a javelin in the hand of a hero
   As the scroll that he reads, whose inmost heart well understands it, is
   goodly wealth with him who is graced by a generous spirit. As a keen
   weapon in the hand of a clear-souled hero, is the loveliness that a
   modest woman owns.
   387. kātalaṉ puṟattoḻukkam kāṇiṉ veṟuppāṉ kātali.
   karuṅkoḷḷum ceṅkoḷḷum tūṇip patakkeṉ
   ṟoruṅkoppak koṇṭāṉām ūraṉ - oruṅkovvā
   naṉṉutalārt tōynta varaimārpaṉ nīrāṭā
   teṉṉaiyum tōya varum.
   The injured wife to her confidante:
   'The lord of the town has bought, it seems, black gram and red gram, a
   tuni and a pathakku, as if they were all the same! He, whose chest is
   broad as a mountain, having associated with the beautiful browed ones ,
   — inferior to me! — unpurified, seeks my society too!'
   388. tuṇaivaṉait tirutta muyalvāḷ tuṇaivi.
   koṭiyavai kūṟāti pāṇa!nī kūṟiṉ
   aṭipaiya iṭṭotuṅkic ceṉṟu — tuṭiyiṉ
   iṭakkaṇ aṉaiyamyām ūraṟ kataṉāl
   valakkaṇ aṉaiyārk kurai.
   The neglected wife
   ‘O minstrel, utter not cruel words, or if thou utter them, softly draw
   back thy step, and go to utter them to those who are like the lute's
   right side; for we, to the lord of the town, are as its left.'
   389. koḻunaṉ vaḻuviṉum aṉpiṟ kuṟaiyāṉ kātali.
   cāyppaṟikka nīrtikaḻun taṇvaya lūraṉmī
   tīppaṟakka nontēṉum yāṉēmaṉ — tīppaṟakkat
   tākki mulai poruta taṇcān taṇiyakalam
   nōkkiyiruntēṉum yāṉ.
   Meek complainings (to her maid).
   'I am she, forsooth, that felt a pang when a fly alighted on the lord
   of the town, surrounded by cool rice-fields over which the waters
   gleam, where they pluck the rich grass! And I am she who have lived to
   look upon his breast adorned with cool sandal-wood paste, which has
   been warmly embraced by others.
   390. talaivaṉ kuṟaiyaik karutāḷ talaivi.
   arumpaviḻ tāriṉāṉ emaruḷum eṉṟu
   perumpoy uraiyāti pāṇa — karumpiṉ
   kaṭaikkaṇ aṉaiyamnām ūraṟ kataṉāl
   iṭaikkaṇ aṉaiyārk kurai.
   The pining wife
   'Minstrel , utter not a gross falsehood, saying that he who wears a
   garland of opening buds will favour us!’
   ‘To the lord of the town we are as the (tasteless) tip of the
   sugar-cane ; therefore, tell (such a tale) to them who are like its
   middle (sweet, juicy) joints.'
   poruṭpāl muṟṟum / End of Part II
   --------------

         pakuti 3 . kāmattuppāl / PART III. ON LOVE (OR PLEASURE)
          40. kāma nutaliyal / Ch. 40. The Characteristics of Love

   391. kūṭalum ūṭalum iṉpattaik kūṭṭum
   muyaṅkākkāl pāyum pacalaimaṟ ṟūṭi
   uyaṅkākkāl uppiṉṟām kāmam — vayaṅkōtam
   nillāt tiraiyalaikkum nīḷkaḻit taṇcērppa!
   pullāp pulappatōr āṟu.
   ‘The way of true love never did run smooth.'
   'Lord of the cool shore of the deep bay, where the gleaming ocean's
   restless billows beat!
   'If there be no fond embrace, a sickly hue will spread itself (over her
   face); and, if there be no lovers' quarrels, love will lack its zest.
   ‘To embrace and disagree is the one way (of love).'
   392. kātalarp pirivu kaṭuntuyar viḷaikkum
   tamamar kātalar tārcūḻ aṇiyakalam
   vimma muyaṅkun tuṇaiyillārk -– kimmeṉap
   peyya eḻili muḻaṅkum ticaiyellām
   neytal aṟaintaṉṉa nīrttu.
   The Lonely one
   ‘To those who were wont to strain in close embrace their own beloved
   whose broad breast was girt with garlands, when the rains patter down,
   it is as though one beat the funeral drum through all the regions where
   the muttering of the thunder is heard from out the clouds; since they
   are deprived of their loved one's society.'
   393. pirintōrkku mālai maiyalaip perukkum
   kammañcey mākkaḷ karuvi oṭukkiya
   mammarkoḷ mālai malarāyntu pūttoṭuppāḷ
   kaimmālai iṭṭuk kaluḻntāḷ tuṇaiyillārk
   kimmālai eṉceyvateṉṟu.
   The forsaken one at eventide
   At wildering eventide, when workmen all put by their tools, she culled
   choice flowers, and wove a gay garland ; — then let it fall from her
   hands, and wailed, 'What can this wreath avail to me who weep alone?’
   394. kaṇavaṉ varunāṭkuṟittu varuntuvaḷ kātali
   celcuṭar nōkkic citararikkaṇ koṇṭanīr
   melviral ūḻteriyā vimmittaṉ — melviraliṉ
   nāḷvaittu naṅkuṟṟam eṇṇuṅkol antōtaṉ
   tōḷvait taṇaimēṟ kiṭantu.
   The lover says to his friend (pākaṉ) in regard to his forsaken bride :
   'Regarding the setting sun, and wiping away one by one with her soft
   finger the tears that well up in her eyes, suffused with red, sobbing
   she lies resting her arms on the couch, setting off the days on those
   same tender fingers : alas; are they my faults she is counting up?'
   395. talaivi nalam pārāṭṭuvaṉ talaivaṉ
   kaṇkayal eṉṉuṅ karuttiṉāl kātali
   piṉceṉṟa tamma ciṟuciral — piṉceṉṟum
   ūkki eḻuntu eṟikallā oṇpuruvam
   kōṭṭiya vilvāk kaṟintu.
   The lover in a figure praises the lustre of his beloved's eye, and the
   beauty of her arched brow; and indicates also his own timid reverence
   ‘The little kingfisher seeing the eyes of my beloved (as she was
   disporting in the tank) and taking them for carp, followed her; but
   though it followed, and poised itself aloft, it darted not down,
   recognising her gleaming brow bent above them as a bow!
   396. uṭaṉpōkku kātalarkku iṉpattai yūṭṭum
   arakkāmpal nāṟumvāy ammaruṅkiṟ kaṉṉō
   paraṟkāṉam āṟṟiṉa kollō — arakkārnta
   pañcikoṇ ṭūṭṭiṉum paiyeṉap paiyeṉaveṉ
   ṟañcippiṉ vāṅkum aṭi.
   The mother bewails the hardships of the rough desert path over which
   her tender daughter will follow her beloved.
   'When I applied the (softest) cotton soaked in the red dye to the foot
   of her whose waist is lovely, and whose mouth breathes the fragrance of
   the red water-lily, did she not cry "gently, gently," and shrinking
   draw it back? And oh! has it endured the stony, desert path? '
   397. maṇantār pirintāl mālai varuttum
   ōlaik kaṇakkar oliyaṭaṅku puṉcekkar
   mālaip poḻutil maṇantār pirivuḷḷi
   mālai parintiṭ ṭaḻutāḷ vaṉamulaimēṟa
   kōlañcey cāntan timirntu.
   Grief of the deserted wife
   When those who con the palm leaf scrolls had ceased, in eve's din
   twilight hour, she thought of her absent spouse! and weeping plucked
   the flowers from out her wreath, and brushed the odorous sandal from
   her lovely breast!
   398. aṉpu peritum āṟṟal uṭaiyatu.
   kaṭakkaruṅ kāṉattuk kāḷaipiṉ nāḷai
   naṭakkavum vallaiyō eṉṟi— cuṭarttoṭīi
   peṟṟāṉ oruvaṉa peruṅkutirai annilaiyē
   kaṟṟāṉ aḵtūrum āṟu.
   The confidante demands of the bride if she can endure to walk after her
   beloved through the desert, she replies :
   'Thou hast said, O maiden with burnished brace - lets ! have you
   strength to walk on the morrow after your beloved? When one (a warrior)
   has obtained a splendid horse, that very instant he has learned how to
   ride it! (his enthusiasm teaches him).
   399. tāy aṉpiṟ kātalaṉ aṉpē ciṟantatu.
   mulaikkaṇṇum muttum muḻumeyyum pullum
   ilakkaṇam yātum aṟiyēṉ — kalaikkaṇam
   vēṅkai verūum neṟiceliya pōlumeṉ
   pūmpāvai ceyta kuṟi .
   The mother now aware of her daughter's flight, says:
   ‘My breast, my necklace of pearls, and my whole body she embraced ! I
   knew not what it portended. It was the sign, it seems, made by my
   lovely one that she was about to set out on the path where the herds of
   antelopes flee in fright from the tiger.'
   400. pirivāṟṟāmai piṇiyēyākum
   kaṇmūṉ ṟuṭaiyāṉum kākkaiyum paiyaravum
   eṉīṉṟa yāyum piḻaittateṉ — poṉīṉṟa
   kōṅkarum paṉṉa mulaiyāy! poruḷvayiṟ
   pāṅkaṉār ceṉṟa neṟi.
   The lady complains of her lover's long absence
   The triple-eyed (Civan), the crow, the hooded snake; the mother that
   bare me: what have these done amiss ? Maiden whose bosom bears the
   Gongu buds, all gold! The way my lover went for wealth is my pain.’
   kāmattuppāl muṟṟum. End of Part III
                        ____________________________

                F. W. ELLIS' S TRANSLATION OF SOME QUATRAINS

   [Number Denotes the Number of the Quatrain]
   NALADIYAR
   2. When by blameless means thou hast acquired great wealth, then,
   sharing it with others, eat fine rice imported on oxen; for fortune
   never standeth in the centre with any one, but shifteth like the wheel
   of a chariot.
   3. He who hath gone forth as the leader of armies' mounted on the neck
   of an elephant and over shadowed by ensigns of dignity, when the power
   of his former deeds are turned against him, will fall and his wedded
   wife be taken by strangers.
   4. Know that those things are uncertain which thou regardest as certain
   and perform quickly every act of charity within thy power; for the days
   of thy life are gone! are gone l and even now death swiftly
   approacheth! approacheth!
   7. Death devours your days using the sun, whence they originate, as the
   measure by which he meteth; be compassionate, therefore, and practice
   virtue assiduously, foramong all born there is none that bath not died.
   8. Those of little understanding, not considering, their natural
   tendency, say “we are wealthy'' ; the greatest wealth, may be utterly
   destroyed and vanish like a flash of lightning darting in the night
   from a black cloud.
   10. Those who avariciously hoard what they have acquired, vexing their
   own bodies by stinting themselves in food and raiment, and not perform
   ing acts of imperishable charity, perish, O King of the mountains
   touching the sky! Witness the bees when deprived of the honey they have
   collected.
   32. Say not foolishly, O my soul! "while here let us pursue our own
   interests and let us die without caring for virtue” ; for, although
   thou mayest live long and prosper, say what wilt thou do when the days
   of thy life are passed?
   33. When the senseless man receives the fruit of his deeds, he sighs
   bitterly and grieves within himself;. the wise, reflecting that it is
   the destined consequence of their sins, hasten to pass the appointed
   limit of their affliction and escape from it.
   34. Having obtained a human form so difficult to obtain, act so as from
   it to acquire great merit; for in the next birth, charity will profit
   thee as the juice of the sugarcane, while thy body will resemble the
   refuse of the cane from which the
   juice has been pressed.
   35. They who have pressed the cane and extracted the juice will not be
   grieved when they see the smoke arising from the refuse while burning,
   nor will they who have acquired the merit accruing from the
   mortification of the body mourn when death approacheth.
   36. Think not whether it will be this day, or that day, or what day,
   but, considering that death even now stands behind thee, eschew evil
   and pursue good in the way prescribed by the eminent ones.
   38. The seed of the Al (Banyan tree) though exceedingly small grows
   large and affords abundant shade; so, however small may be the benefit
   of a virtuous act, it facilitates, when conferred on the worthy, the
   attainment of heaven.
   59. He who has power to observe the rule he has professed and to keep
   himself undisturbed by the operation of the organs of sense, namely,
   the body, mouth, eyes, nose, and ears, shall assuredly obtain eternal
   beatitude.
   74. Knowing what ought to be known and submitting thereto; fearing what
   ought to be feared; performing every duty so as to satisfy the world;
   and living in the enjoyment of pleasure according to their means; they
   who are thus disposed never experience the evils of life.
   79. Flee from pleasure when thou canst enjoy it, if disgrace attend it;
   O Lord of the high country abundant in waters! though pleasure only be
   constantly regarded it is preferable to enjoy it in a harmless way.
   80. Although thyself be ruined, think not of prejudicing others,
   however, they may deserve it; eat not with those with whom thou
   shouldest not eat (enemies, irreclaimable sinners, and the rest) even
   though thou lose the flesh of thy body by hunger; speak not falsehood,
   intermixed with truth, although the whole world canopied by the heavens
   be thy reward.
   101. As a young calf when let loose among a number of cows, naturally
   seeketh out and attacheth itself to its own mother, in like manner doth
   the act of a former state of existence seek out and attach itself to
   him who hath performed it.
   104. To avoid those things which are to happen, or to detain those
   which are to depart is alike impossible even to Saints; even as there
   is none who can give rain out of season, or prevent its falling in
   season.
   107. Behold all those whose bosoms are goaded by distress and who
   wander forlorn through the long streets, and know, O Lord of the cool
   shore of the billowy ocean, where the playful swans tear in pieces the
   water-flowers, that this proceeds from
   the acts of former births.
   108. When those, who not only are not ignorant but have learned that
   which they ought to know, do that which is blameable ; this, O king of
   the cool shore of the broad ocean, where the water-lily flings its
   odours to the winds, proceeds from the acts they have formerly done.
   110. The effect of the acts of former births doth not fall below, nor
   exceed its due proportion, nor doth it fail to come in its turn,
   neither doth it assist out of season, but where it ought to be, there
   it is ; of what utility, therefore, is sorrow when it afflicteth thee?
   116. Although deeply instructed in the knowledge of truth, those who
   have not accustomed themselves to restraint can never be restrained, O
   large-eyed beauty! thus, though the wild pumpkin be dressed with salt,
   clarified butter, milk, curd and various condiments, its natural
   bitterness will never be removed.
   158. If one be deaf to the secrets of others, blind to the wife of his
   neighbour, though well acquainted with her excellencies, and dumb in
   calumniating others, in him it is not necessary to inculcate virtue.
   183. Laying up seed for heaven, without delusion of mind and void of
   all distress enjoy life like the wise, maintaining your proper station,
   but remembering always that there are various things that change their
   nature without efficient cause.
   201. As a mother forgets the pains and trouble she suffered during
   pregnancy and child-birth, when she sees her infant on her lap; so the
   distress a man suffers from poverty and other misfourtune disappears on
   the sight of his relations enquiring for him.
   205. Those who, making no distinctions between dispositions or
   conditions, relations or strangers, actuated by their natural feelings
   alone, seek all who are in poverty or affliction and relieve their
   distress, will be regarded by every one as preeminently worthy.
   206. Than to eat on a golden dish rice, white as the claws of a tiger,
   mixed with sugar and milk, from the hands of an enemy, it is sweeter to
   take a mess of grass-reeds, without salt and in any kind of dish, in
   the house of a relation dear as life.
   208. Even those who hare been pleasantly entertained by another, as
   frequently as a hammer strikes the anvil, will forsake him as the tongs
   do the iron on entering the fire! but those who are truly worthy of
   being called friends, will adhere to him in distress, as the rod by
   which it is turned adhereth to the metal in the forge.
   209. O thou who are adorned by a cool and fragrant garland! when
   relations have partaken of the prosperity of their relations, if they
   partake not, also of their adversity until death, is there anything
   they can do for them in the other world ?
   211. Friendship with the wise, whose intelligence divines one's
   thoughts, is like eating a sugarcane from the top (as its sweetness
   increases more and more); connection with persons without sweetness of
   disposition is like eating it from the opposite end (the flavour
   decreasing by degrees).
   213. Avoiding the friendship of those who resemble elephants, seek the
   friendship of those who resemble dogs; for an elephant will kill his
   driver, whom he hath known for a long time, but a dog will wag his tail
   while the spear thrown at him is still in his body.
   214. Men cleave not to those, to whom their hearts cleave not within a
   short space, though familiar with them for a long time: but will the
   friendship interwoven with the idea of those intertwined with their
   hearts, be abandoned, though they are for a long time absent?
   215. The preservation of friendship is when affection continues
   affection, like the flower of the branch, which being blown, closeth
   not again! those who resemble the flowers of the pool, which having
   blown, again close their petals, know neither
   affection, nor friendship.
   221. When those we greatly love and esteem as virtuous, prove
   otherwise, this ought to be carefully concealed; for rice in the grain
   hath a husk water foam, and flowers some unfragrant leaves.
   224. O Lord of the wave-resounding shore, where bright-rayed pearls are
   thrown up by the rolling billows and where float swift-sailing ships!
   if friends, from whom it is difficult to separate, possess not virtuous
   dispositions, they are a fire kindled to burn our hearts.
   225. Is it right utterly to abandon friends, whom it is so difficult to
   forsake, though guilty of evil deeds. O Lord of the renowned mountains,
   which covered by the long stems of bamboos pierce the sky? Will men cut
   off their hand because it has struck
   their eye?
   230. If, after contracting a firm friendship with any one I set myself
   to note his good and bad qualities, may I be cast into the hell, where
   the traitor, who discovereth the secrets of his friends is punished,
   and may I be scoffed at by the whole world!
   232. The friendship of eminent men is eminently illustrious, and as
   productive of benefit as timely rain; but the friendship of the mean
   even in the time of their prosperity, resembleth, O Lord of the country
   of clear waters! the failure of rain
   in due season.
   233. The enjoyment of the friendship of men of acute understandings is
   desirable as the joys of Heaven; but connection with unprofitable men,
   uninstructed in science and literature, is a very hell.
   234. Our intimacy with those, to whom we are not bound by the chain of
   friendship, O prince of the hills, the sides of which are covered by
   groves of tall sandal trees! though it seemeth day by day to increase,
   may be dissolved as instantaneously as
   the fire catcheth the straw.
   238. If I stretch not forth my hand and deliver my whole soul without
   hesitation to my friend, when he is in distress, may I be cast into the
   hell, where the wretch is punished who hath violated the chaste wife of
   his friend, and may I be scoffed at throughout the far-famed earth.
   244. Although the fruit of the plantain be ripened in the bitter leaves
   of the Vembu, it will not lose its natural sweetness; thus although
   they who are naturally good associate with the bad, their friendship
   for them will not corrupt their minds.
   245. Sweet water may be produced even on the side of the sea-shore and
   salt water on the side of a mountain. O Lord of the cool shore washed
   by the waves of the Ocean ! it is truly said that sensible men will not
   imitate those with whom they consort, but will preserve their own
   minds.
   246. O Lord of the cool shore of the Ocean, where the thick-boughed
   Punnei flourisheth! Will those, who are virtuous and impartial towards
   all, first contract and then dissolve friendship? than this it is
   better that friendship should never be contracted.
   247. To be united in friendship with the prudent, who think of that of
   which they ought to think, is productive of the highest felicity, and
   affliction is avoided by separating from fools who know not what
   belongeth to friendship.
   256. Those whose tongues are adorned by learning and knowledge (the
   wise) fear the disgrace of evil speaking; the unwise indulge therein:
   thus on the palm-tree the dry leaves maintain a perpetual rustling,
   while the green leaves make no noise.
   321. The moral precepts benevolently delivered by the kind-hearted, the
   wise receive to their benefit, but the ignorant, devoid of all good
   qualities, treat them with scorn; thus the ladle tasteth not the
   sweetness of the milk porridge it contains.
   335. If a fool, when angry with others without any cause for anger,
   like one who supposes he hath made an acquisition, without having in
   reality obtained anything, bewildered by passion, cannot crowd together
   abusive words, his tongue tingles all over.
   344. If the virtuous have received a favour as small as a grain of
   millet they will consider it as large as a palm-tree; but if a favour
   as large as a palm, O king of the Country washed by the sparkling
   waves! be conferred on the ungrateful, it will produce no benefit.
   346. The worthy, although they have attained to wealth and dominion,
   indulge not in haughty language, but if the mean have acquired the
   wealth of one Cani (1/80th part) added to one Mundire (1/320th) they
   will regard themselves as Indren, the king of heaven.
   353. O Lord of the country covered by mountains ! although it may be
   difficult to extol the good qualities of persons before their faces, of
   what are the tongues of those wretches made, who standing in their
   presence, declare their faults for the
   purpose of destroying their reputation ?
   356. The mountaineer thinks of his mountains, the husband-man of the
   cultivable land, the produce of which he gathers; the wise think of the
   special benefits they have received from others, and the fool keeps
   himself only in his own mind.
   357. For one good turn they have received from another the wise will
   endure a hundred evils afterwards inflicted; but if they have received
   a hundred good turns and have suffered only one evil turn, fools will
   consider the hundred good turns as evils.
   362. Though women of light conversation (!) be as strictly guarded as
   the blade of a sword is care fully preserved (!); yet, if by any
   relaxation of vigilance, an opportunity be offered to them, little of
   this time will be occupied by deeds which are not evil, and much of it
   by them.
   363. The woman, who hold in opposition threateneth blows, is as death;
   She, who resorteth not to her kitchen betimes in the morning, is an
   incurable disease ;
   And she, who, having prepared food, grudgeth it to those who eat it, is
   a devil to domestic happiness;
   Women of these three descriptions are a destroying weapon to their
   husbands.
   370. When rightly perpended the water of the freshes and the love of
   women adorned with ear-rings differ not; for the water of the freshes
   will be dried up when the rain ceaseth, and so will their love when the
   income faileth.
   371. When rightly perpended the light of a lamp and the love of
   courtezans differ not; for the former is extinguished when the oil is
   dried up, and the latter estranged when the empty hand no longer
   contains money.
   373. Let them have been even as liberal as Shenganmal (sic) the goddess
   of prosperity, who is worshipped by the gods in the beauteous Heavens,
   courtezans whose hands are tinted like opening buds, will forsake those
   who have no wealth to bestow upon them, reverentially saluting them
   with folded hands.
   381. Although women are high in reputation and equal to the goddess
   Ayrani in conjugal fidelity, they must cautiously avoid those who are
   enamoured of them and follow them in hopes of gratifying their passions
   ! for such caution is the safe-guard of the virtue of matrons with
   perfumed foreheads.
   382. If in time of distress, when the meal of the whole family is
   cooked by the water of a small pot, a host of relations sufficient to
   consume the water of the sea should come at once, the softly speaking
   woman, who shews herself as bounteous as the
   ocean, is the glory of her house.
   383. Though her house be open on the four quarters, though it be
   exceedingly small, and though the rain pour in on every side, a chaste
   and virtuous woman will be renowned in the place in which she resideth
   and her habitation respected.
   384. She who is pleasing to the eye, who in all things gratifieth her
   husband according to his desire and at all times standeth in awe of
   him, whose modesty is so conspicuous as shame her sex, who reverenceth
   her husband, and in all her love- quarrels with him acteth with such
   prudence that reconciliation affordeth him increased delight; this
   mildly speaking matron is truly a woman.
   385. Whenever our husbands embrace our shoulders, we feel ashamed, as
   if we saw them for the first time; what pleasure then can those women
   enjoy, who, from the desire of money, endure daily the embraces of many
   men ?
   386. Riches in the possession of a generous man resemble in their
   effects the learning acquired by a man of great natural ability ; the
   chastity of a modest woman is like a sharp sabre in the hands of a
   courageous man.
   ---------------

                  pāṭṭu mutaṟkuṟippu akaravaricai

   ceyyuḷ - eṇ             ceyyuḷ eṇ
   akattārē vāḻvār eṉ 31   āḷpārt tuḻalum20
   akkēpōl aṅkai123        āṟṟun tuṇaiyum196
   aṅkaṇ vicumpiṉ -aka 151 āṉpaṭu neypey 239
   aṅkaṇ vicumpiṉ -am 373  icainta ciṟumai 187
   aṅkōṭ ṭakalalkul 372    icaiyā oruporuḷ111
   accam peritāl 81        icaiyā teṉiṉum 194
   aṭukkal malaināṭa 203   icaiyum eṉiṉum 152
   aṭaintārp pirivum 173   iṭampaṭa meyññāṉam 116
   attiṭṭa kūṟai 281       iṭumpaikūr neñcattār 107
   ampal ayal eṭuppa87     iṭṭāṟṟup paṭṭoṉ 288
   ampum aḻalum 89         imaikkum aḷaviltam 323
   arakkāmpal nāṟumvāy 396 immi aricit94
   arukala tākip 261       immai payakkumāl132
   arumpaviḻ tāriṉāṉ 390   immaiyum naṉṟām 294
   arumpeṟal yākkaiyaip34  iravalar kaṉṟāka 279
   arumpeṟaṟ kaṟpiṉ 381    irukkai eḻalum 143
   aruḷiṉ aṟamuṟaikkum321  irumpārkkuṅ kālarāy 122
   alakucāl kaṟpiṉ 140     ilaṅkunīrt taṇcērppa 227
   avamatippum āṉṟa 163    illam iḷamai 53
   avviyam illār 322       illā iṭattum 91

   aḻalmaṇṭu pōḻtiṉ 202   illāmai kantā 303
   aḷḷikkoḷ vaṉṉa 262     iḻittakka ceytoruvaṉ302
   aṟampukaḻ kēṇmai82     iḻaittanāḷ ellai6
   aṟimiṉ aṟaneṟi 172     iḷaiyāṉ aṭakkam 65
   aṟiyāp paruvat 171     iṟappac ciṟiteṉṉā 99
   aṟiyārum allar 108     iṟappa niṉaiyuṅkāl 174
   aṟiva taṟintaṭaṅki 74  iṟappavē tīya223
   aṟucuvai uṇṭi1         iṟcārviṉ ēmāntōm 182
   ākā teṉiṉum337         iṟpiṟappillār 320
   āṭukōṭāki192           iṟpiṟap peṇṇi 212
   āṇamil neñcat374       iṉanaṉmai iṉcoloṉ 146
   āmāpōl nakki377        iṉiyārtam neñcattu369
   ārtta aṟiviṉar351      iṉpam payantāṅ79
   ārtta poṟiya290        iṉṟātum innilaiyē359
   āvānām ākkam32         iṉṟukol aṉṟukol36
   āvēṟuru viṉ118         iṉṉar iṉaiyar205
   iṉṉā iyaika 306        eytiyirunta 325
   iṉṉā ceyiṉum - iṉi76   eṟinīrp peruṅkaṭal 275
   iṉṉā ceyiṉum - viṭa225 eṟiyeṉ ṟetirniṟpāḷ 363
   iṉṉā ceyiṉum - viṭu226 eṟṟoṉṟum illā 150

   īṭṭalum tuṉpamaṟ 280    eṉakkuttā yākiyāḷ 15
   īṇṭunīr vaiyattuḷ109    eṉateṉa teṉṟirukkum 276
   īta licaiyā181          eṉpāy ukiṉum 292
   īṉamāy illirun198       eṉṟum putiyār 307
   uṭāatum uṇṇātum10       eṉṉāṉum oṉṟutam5
   uṭukkai ulaṟi 141       eṉṉēmaṟ ṟivvuṭampu330
   uṭaipperuñ celvarum 368 ēṭṭaip paruvattum 358
   uṭaiyār ivareṉ 160      ētilār ceyta 228
   uṇara uṇarum 247        ēmānta pōḻtiṉ 378
   uṇṭāya pōḻtiṉ 284       ēṟṟakai māṟṟāmai 98
   uṇṇāṉ oḷiniṟāṉ 9        oṇkatir vāḷmatiyam176
   upakāram ceytataṉai 69  orunaṉṟi ceytavark 357
   uyirpōyār veṇṭalai 50   orunīrp piṟantōruṅku 236
   uruviṟ kamaintāṉkaṇ 240 orupuṭai pāmpu 148
   uruvum iḷamaiyum 102    oruva roruvaraic 309
   ulakaṟiyat tīrak 204    ōkkiya oḷvāḷtaṉ 129
   uḷanāḷ cilavāl 324      ōtiyum ōtār 270
   uḷkūr paciyāl 286       ōlaik kaṇakkar 397
   uḷḷattāṉ naḷḷā 128      kaṭakam ceṟintataṅ 289
   uḷḷat tuṇarvuṭaiyāṉ 386 kaṭakkaruṅ kāṉattuk 398

   uḷḷam oruvaṉ 380              kaṭamā tolaicciya 300
   uṟakkum tuṇaiyatōr 38         kaṭalcārntum iṉṉīr 245
   uṟaṟpāla nīkkal 104           kaṭittuk karumpiṉaik 156
   uṟupuli ūṉirai 193            kaṭippiṭu kaṇmuracam 100
   uṟupuṉal tantula 185          kaṭiyeṉak kēṭṭuṅ 364
   uṟaipparuṅ kālattum 184       kaṭukki oruvaṉ 189
   ūkkittām koṇṭa 57             kaṭukkeṉac colvaṟṟām 348
   ūraṅ kaṇanīr 175              kaṭaiyāyār naṭpiṟ 216
   ūruḷ eḻunta 90                kaṭaiyelām kāypaci 297
   ūṟi uvarttakka 47             kaṭkiṉiyāḷ kātalaṉ 384
   ūṟucey neñcamtam 379          kaṇamalai naṉṉāṭa 353
   eññāṉṟum emkaṇavar 385        kaṇam koṇṭu cuṟṟattār 25
   ettuṇai yāṉum 272             kaṇkayal eṉṉuṅ 395
   ennilattu vittiṭiṉum 243      kaṇmūṉ ṟuṭaiyāṉum 400
   emmai aṟintilir 165           kappi kaṭavatāk 341
   kammañcey mākkaḷ 393          koṭuttalum tuyttalum 274
   karavāta tiṇṇaṉpiṉ 305        koypul koṭuttuk 350
   karuṅkoḷḷum ceṅ 387           kolaiñar ulaiyēṟṟit 331
   karuttuṇarntu kaṟṟaṟintār 211 kollai yirumpuṉattuk 178
   karumamum uṭpaṭāp 250         koṉṉē kaḻintaṉ 55

   karuma varicaiyāṟ 249     kōṭēn takavalkuṟ 354
   karumpāṭṭik kaṭṭi 35      kōṭṭuppūppōla 215
   kaleṟin taṉṉa 66          kōtai yaruvik 71
   kalnaṉi nalla 334         kōḷāṟṟak koḷḷāk 191
   kallāk kaḻippar 366       cakkarac celvam 346
   kallātu nīṇṭa 254         cāyppaṟikka nīrtikaḻun 389
   kallātu pōkiya 169        cāṉṟāṇmai cāyal 142
   kallāmai accam 145        cāṉṟōr eṉamatittuc 126
   kallārē yāyiṉum 139       citalai tiṉappaṭṭa 197
   kalleṉṟu tantai 253       ciṟukā perukā 110
   kallōṅ kuyarvaraimēṟ 283  ciṟukālai yētamakkuc 328
   kalvi karaiyila 135       cariyār kēṇmai 232
   kaḻintār iṭutalai 49      cennellā lāya 367
   kaḻinīruṭ kāraṭ 217       cemmaiyoṉ ṟiṉṟic 85
   kaḷarnilat tuppiṟanta 133 ceykai yaḻintu 147
   kaḷḷārkaḷ uṇṇār 157       ceyyāta ceytumnām 235
   kaṟṟatūu miṉṟik 314       celcuṭar nōkkic 394
   kaṟṟaṟinta nāviṉār 256    cellā iṭattum 149
   kaṟṟaṉavum kaṇṇakaṉṟa 340 celvaryām eṉṟutām 8
   kaṟṟār uraikkuṅ 260       celvuḻik kaṇorunāḷ154

   kaṉaikaṭal taṇcērppa 138  ceḻumperum poykai 352
   kāṇiṉ kuṭippaḻiyām 84     ceṟippil paḻaṅkūrai 231
   kātalār colluṅ 73         ceṟuttō ṟuṭaip 222
   kālāṭu pōḻtil 113         ceṉṟē eṟipa 24
   kāvā toruvaṉtaṉ 63        coltaḷarntu kōl 13
   kāḻāya koṇṭu 342          coṟṟāṟṟuk koṇṭu 313
   kuñci yaḻakum 131         takkārum takkavar 112
   kuṭanīraṭ ṭuṇṇum 382      takkōlam tiṉṟu 43
   kuṭarum koḻuvum 46        taṅkaṇ marapillār 336
   kulamtavam kalvi 333      taṇṭāc ciṟappiṉ tam 62
   kuṟṟamum ēṉaik 230        tamareṉṟu tāṅkoḷḷap 229
   kūrttunāy kauvik 70       tamamar kātalar 392
   kēḷātē vantu 30           tammai ikaḻntamai 58
   koṭiyavai kūṟāti 388      tammai ikaḻvārait 117
   talaiyē tavam muyaṉṟu 365 nallār nayava 265
   tavalarun tolkēḷvit 137   naḷikaṭal taṇcērppa - nal 242
   taḷirmēlē niṟpiṉum 355    naḷikaṭal taṇcērppa - nāḷ 166
   taṉatākat tāṉkoṭāṉ 278    naṟumalar taṇkōtāyt 209
   tāmēyum iṉpuṟār 327       naṉṉilaikkaṇ taṉṉai 248
   tām ceyviṉaiyallāl 120    nāppāṭam colli 312

   tāḻāt taḷarāt 14           nāykkāṟ ciṟuviralpōl 218
   tāṉkeṭiṉum takkārkē 80     nārttoṭut tīrkkileṉ 26
   tiruttaṉṉai nīppiṉum 304   nālāṟum āṟāy 383
   tirumatukai yākat 291      nāḷvāyp peṟiṉuntan 207
   tiṉaittuṇaiya rākittam 105 nāṟāt takaṭēpōl 266
   tiṉaiyaṉaittē yāyiṉum 344  nilanalattāl nantiya 179
   tīṅkarum pīṉṟa 199         nilaiyāmai nōymūppuc 52
   tukaḷtīr peruñcelvam 2     niṉṟaṉa niṉṟaṉa 4
   tukkattuḷ tūṅki 121        nīriṉum nuṇṇitu 282
   tuyttuk kaḻiyāṉ 273        nīruṭ piṟantu 360
   tuṉpamē mītūraka 60        nīrmaiyē yaṉṟi 287
   tuṉpam palanāḷ 54          nuṇṇuṇarvi ṉāroṭu 233
   teṇṇīrk kuvaḷai 44         nuṇṇuṇar viṉmai 251
   teriyat teriyun 168        neṭuṅkālam ōṭiṉum 68
   teḷivilār naṭpiṟ 219       neruppaḻal cērntakkāl 124
   tōṇi iyakkuvāṉ 136         nērallār nīralla 72
   tōṟpōrvai mēlum 42         nērttu nikarallār 64
   tōṟṟamcāl ñāyiṟu 7         pakaivar paṇiviṭam 241
   nacciyārk kiyāmai 299      paṭumaḻai mokkuḷil 27
   naṭukkuṟṟut taṟcērntār 93  paṇṭam aṟiyār 48
   naṭuvūruḷ vētikai 96       paravā veḷippaṭā 88

   naṭṭārkkum naḷḷā 271       parāaraip puṉṉai 246
   naṭpunār aṟṟaṉa 12         paruvam eṉaittuḷ 18
   nammālē yāvarin 301        palanāḷum pakkattā 214
   nayavārkaṇ nalkuravu 267   pallār aṟiyap 86
   narampeḻuntu nalkūrntā 153 pallāvuḷ uyttu 101
   naraivarum eṉṟeṇṇi 11      pallāṉṟa kēḷvip - pāṭa 252
   nalāviṉ kaṉṟāyiṉ 115       pallāṉṟa kēḷvip - vīya 106
   nalla kulameṉṟum 195       paḻamaikan tākap 310
   nallar peritaḷiyar 298     paḻaiya rivareṉṟu 349
   nallavai ceyyiṉ 144        paṉipaṭu cōlaip 17
   nallavai nāṭoṟum 338       paṉṟikkūḻp pattaril 257
   nallār eṉattām 221         paṉṉāḷum ceṉṟakkāl 159
   pāṭamē ōtip 316            malaimicait tōṉṟum 21
   pāmpiṟ korutalai 375       malku tiraiya 263
   pālāṟ kaḻīip 258           mallaṉmā ñālattu 296
   pālō ṭaḷāyanīr 177         maḻaitiḷaikkum māṭamāy 361
   pāvamum ēṉaip 295          maṟumaikku vittu 183
   piṟanta kulammāyum 285     maṟumaiyum immaiyum 95
   piṟarmaṟai yiṉkaṇa 158     maṟṟaṟivām nalviṉai 19
   pukka viṭattaccam 83       maṉattāṉ maṟuvil 180

   puṇarkaṭalcūḻ vaiyattup 264  maṉaippācam kaiviṭāy 130
   putuppuṉalum pūṅkuḻaiyār 370 maṉṟam kaṟaṅka 23
   puttakamē cālat 318          maṉṉar tiruvum 167
   pulnuṉimēl nīrpōl 29         mākkēḻ maṭanallāy 41
   pullā eḻuttiṉ 155            māṇṭa kuṇattōṭu 56
   pullāppuṉ kōṭṭip 255         māṟṟārāy niṉṟutam 67
   >
   puṟattuttāṉ iṉmai 308        māṉa aruṅkalam 40
   peyaṟpāl maḻaipeyyāk 97      muṭṭikai pōla 208
   periyavar kēṇmai 125         muṭṭuṟṟa pōḻtiṉ 238
   periyār perunaṭpuk 77        muyaṅkākkāl pāyum 391
   periyār perumai 170          mulaikkaṇṇum muttum 399
   perukuvatu pōlat 234         mullai mukaimuṟuval 45
   peruṅkaṭalāṭiya 332          muṟṟaṟ ciṟumanti 237
   perunaṭai tāmpeṟiṉum 343     muṟṟuṟṟun tuṟṟiṉai 190
   perumut taraiyar 200         muṉṉarē cānāḷ 92
   peruvarai nāṭa 186           mūppumēl vārāmai 326
   peṟuvatu koḷpavar 317        meyññāṉak kōṭṭi 311
   peṟuvatoṉ ṟiṉṟiyum 335       meyvāykaṇ mūkkuc 59
   pottanūṟ kallum 376          melliya nallāruḷ 188
   poḻintiṉitu nāṟiṉum 259      maitīr pacumpoṉmēl 347
   poḻippakalam nuṭpa nūl 319   yāar ulakattōr 119

   poṟuppareṉ ṟeṇṇip 161     yāar oruvar 127
   poṟkalattup peyta 206     yākkaiyai yāppuṭaittāp 28
   poṟkalat tūṭṭip 345       yāmāyiṉ emillam 293
   poṉṉiṟac cenneṟ 269       yāṉai aṉaiyavar 213
   poṉṉē koṭuttum 162        yāṉai yeruttam 3
   makkaḷā lāya 37           vaṭuvilā vaiyattu 114
   maṭitirai tantiṭṭa 224    vayāvum varuttamum 201
   matittiṟap pārum 61       valavaika ḷallātār 268
   marīip palarōṭu 220       vaḻaṅkāta celvariṉ 277
   malainalam uḷḷum 356      vaḻukkeṉaittum illāta 362
   vaḷampaṭa vēṇṭātār 103    viṉaippayaṉ vantakkāl 33
   vaṟṟimaṟ ṟāṟṟap 78        veṟiayar veṅkaḷattu 16
   vāḻnāṭ kalakā 22          veṟumai yiṭattum 329
   vāṉoṭu villiṉ 0           veṉṟip poruṭṭāl 315
   viriniṟa nākam 164        vēmpiṉ ilaiyuṭ 244
   viruppilā rillattu 210    vēṟṟumai yiṉṟik 75
   viḻaintoruvar tammai 339  vaikalum vaikal 39
   viḷakkup pukairuḷ 51      vaippuḻik kōṭpāṭā 134
   viḷakkoḷiyum vēcaiyar 371

   pāṭṭu mutaṟkuṟippu akaravaricai muṟṟum.
   GLOSSARY
   aā - alas!
   aḵku - diminish.
   akaṭu - centre.
   akattār - those within.
   akattu – inwardly.
   akalam - chest, breast of a man.
   akaḻ - dig.
   akkāram - sugar.
   akku - armlets of conch-shell.
   aṅkaṇam - a gutter, drain.
   acā - feebleness.
   acai - be unsteady, waver.
   accam - dread; guilty fear.
   accu - axle.
   añcutal - fearing, dreading; shrinking from.
   aññāṉam - unwisdom, folly.
   aṭakkam - self-restraint; modesty.
   aṭakku - restrain; hide, bury.
   aṭaku - greens, vegetables.
   aṭaṅku - lean self-restraint ; subside, sink down ; cease.
   aṭampampū - a kind of creeper.
   aṭu - cook; kill.
   aṭuttaṭuttu - with increasing vehemence.
   aṭuppu - hearth.
   aṭai -draw near; take shelter; attain unto; be closed.
   aṭṭil - cook-house.
   aṇaṅku - affliction.
   aṇi - beautiful, nearness.
   aṇiyakalam - beautiful chest.
   aṇiyar - those who are near.
   aṇai - a dam; a pillow, mattress ; tie.
   aṇ - (as a formative) place.
   aṇṇā - lift up the head to look.
   atar - path, public road.
   attu - a red dye.
   antō - alas!
   apakāram - injury.
   aparāṇam - afternoon.
   amarar - immortals, gods.
   amar - fondly love.
   amiḻtu - ambrosia.
   amainta - thorough, full; fitness, things agreeable to; possessing in
   full measure.
   amaivu - fitness.
   am - beautiful.
   ampal - scandal, evil report.
   ampu - arrow.
   amma - an expletive; probably a voc. of ammai.
   ammaruṅku - beautiful hip.
   ammaṉai - mother.
   ammā - a stronger form of amma: a particle indicating surprise or
   emotion : 'Ah, do so!'
   ayar - perform.
   ayalār - neighbours.
   ayirāṇi, (aiyirāṇi) - wife of Indra.
   ayil - keenness; keen-edged.
   arakku - red; gum-lac.
   araṇ - stronghold.
   araṟṟu - cry; reiterate foolishly ; reverberate.
   arā - serpents.
   ari(mā) - lion.
   arici - rice unboiled.
   aritu - hard, rarely or never.
   arukalatu - being without diminution.
   aruku - neighborhood; draw near.
   aruṅkalam - precious ornaments.
   aruttam - wealth.
   arumai - impossible; impregnable.
   arum - hard to obtain, bear up against etc.
   arumpu - a flower-bud.
   aruvi - a water-fall.
   aruḷu - regard with favour.
   aruḷ - grace, favour, benevolence.
   arō- a mere expletive.
   alaku - computation.
   alakucāṟkaṟpu -infinite learning.
   alari - flower.
   alavaṉ - crab.
   alaṟu - lament aloud.
   ali - hermaphrodite.
   alai - wave; cause to wave, agitate.
   al, aṉmai - not being.
   alku- grow less.
   allal - suffering, privation; want; poverty.
   avā - intense desire.
   avāttakka - such as eyes covet.
   avāvu - desire, covet.
   avi - soften, abate, become extinguished.
   avir - glisten.
   aviḻ - loosen; expand.
   avai- assembly.
   avviyam - envy.
   aḻal - fire, heat.
   aḻi - perish, go to ruin; destroy; waste away; loose; fall into
   despair.
   aḻu - weep aloud.
   aḻuku - rot away.
   aḻuṅku - sink down; be injured, be sullied; be destroyed.
   aḻuttu - set in; inlay (jewels in gold).
   aḷavu - a measure.
   aḷāvu - mingle.
   aḷi- tenderness, kindness, gentle-minded.
   aḷḷu - take by handfuls.
   aṟattāṟu - the path of virtue.
   aṟattuppāl -the part which treats of virtue.
   aṟam, aṟaṉ - virtue; charity; justice.
   aṟi - know.
   aṟu - sever, cut off ; fail.
   aṟai - sound; strike.
   aṟputtaḷai (aṉputtaḷai) - bond of love.
   aṟṟam (=vaṟumai) - destitution, poverty.
   aṉaittu - so much as, such like.
   aṉaiyam - we are as.
   aṉaiyavum- all.
   aṉṟil - a fabulous bird which is said never to survive its mate
   aṉṟu - it is not.
   aṉṉam - a kind of swan.
   aṉṉō - an interjection: alas!
   ā, āṉ - cow.
   āayakkāl - when it is.
   ākā - will not become, will not befit.
   ākuvar - they will flourish.
   ākkam - increase; wealth.
   ākku - make, cause; kindle.
   āṅku -there; then; just so; so; as.
   āṭu - swing, oscillate; play, dance; move briskly; bathe.
   āṭci - the use, mastery, practice; exercise of anything.
   āṭṭu - grind in a mill.
   āṇam - love.
   āṇ - male ; masculine character.
   āṇṭaik katavu- the gate of paradise.
   ātunām - we shall prosper.
   āmai - turtle, tortoise.
   āmpal - the red and white water-lily.
   āyiravar - thousands of persons.
   āyiḻai - an exquisite jewel.
   āyiṉ - if it be [Neg. illāyiṉ].
   āy - a mother; investigate; seek out; cull; care for.
   āra - fully; our fill.
   ār- become full; feed full; sound; resound; hum; bind; ripe.
   ālam , āl - a banyan tree, Ficus Indica.
   āvatu -it will serve; resulting benefit.
   āvām -(we) shall prosper.
   āḻ - deep; sink.
   āḷaṉ - he who possesses or exercises.
   āl - a person; a slave; rule; use.
   āṟu - a river ; a direction ; grow cool ; become mitigated or healed.
   āṟṟa - much.
   āṟṟal - power (of action and endurance).
   āṟṟātār - the poor and helpless; those who are unable to do anything in
   return.
   āṟṟāmai - weakness; an in tolerable injury
   āṉṟa - widely diffused.
   iḵtu - this.
   ika - leave behind; pass over, transcend.
   ikal - jealous rivalry.
   ikaḻ - despise.
   icai - fame; agree; fall to the lot of; be possible, succeed; be
   innate; sound out.
   iṭam, iṭaṉ - place; left side; where and when.
   iṭampaṭa - extensively.
   iṭar - affliction: pinch of poverty.
   iṭi - thunder, send forth bolts ; crush, pound in a mortar.
   iṭu - give, put.
   iṭukkaṇ - want, straitened circumstances.
   iṭumpai- want, poverty; annoyance.
   irumai - the two states: this. world and the next.
   iṭai (naṭu) - middle (course; sort of people).
   iṭaitiri - change; deteriorate
   iṭaiterintu - knowing (it) through and through.
   iṭaimiṭai - commingle.
   iṭaiyiṭaiyē - everywhere between
   iṭṭāṟu - straitened circumstances.
   imai - wink, close the eyes; shine, twinkle as jewels.
   imi - a very small fraction: 1/1,075,200; an atom.
   immiyarici - a small seed of a wild grass.
   immeṉa - 'with pattering sound' =so as to say.
   immai - state in this world.
   iyakku, iyaṅku - move (tr. &. int.)
   iyalu - be possible; be composed of.
   iyal - nature.
   iyalpu - nature; goodness.
   iyai (= icai ) - be practicable ; combine ; adhere to.
   iṟu- come to an end, die; be broken.
   ira - beg, ask.
   iraṭṭi- twice as much.
   iravalar - mendicants.
   iravu - mendicity.
   iri - be driven away, take to flight.
   irintaikka (=oḻika) - "be it put away!
   iru - two; great; sit; remain, be; an auxiliary.
   iruntai - charcoal.
   irumai - the two states; this world and the next.
   irai -food, fodder, provender of animals, prey.
   ilakkaṇam - sign.
   ilaṅku - glisten, shimmer.
   ilar, ilār - those without.
   il - house; wife ; family ; domestic enjoyment; root, used absolutely
   in predication.[ Opp. uṇṭu ].
   iḻa - lose ; sacrifice.
   iḻi - suffer degradation ; degrade.
   iḻukku - a fault, failure [Opp. oḻukku] ; slip.
   iḻai - (meto.) jewel; jewelled lady; determine; plan; hasten on.
   iḷam, iḷai- tender, young.
   iḷampiṟai - the young (crescent) moon.
   iḷi - disgrace [Opp. oḷi].
   iḷaiyam- 'we are young.'
   iḷaiyāṉ - a youth.
   iṟa - pass on, by, away ; die [Opp. piṟa]; surpass.
   iṟu - come to an end, die; be broken.
   iṟai - draw near and pour out.
   iṟaiñcu - bow before.
   iṟṟu- of this kind; thus.
   iṟṟuḻi (iṟṟavuḻi) - when it is broken.
   iṉam - race, kind, family, genus.
   iṉiya - sweet, pleasant.
   iṉaiyar - such, of such account; so many.
   iṉpam, iṉpu - pleasure.
   iṉmai (il +mai) - absence of; poverty, destitution.
   iṉṟi - destitute.
   iṉṟu - is not; today.
   iṉṉa(r) - such like (person).
   iṉṉā - bitter; evil.
   iṉṉāṅku - trouble.
   iṉṉāmai- affliction.
   iṉṉiṉiyē - this very instant.
   iṉṉē - even now.
   ī - a fly; give.
   īṅku - here.
   īṭṭu - collect, store up, hoard.
   īṇṭu - here, in this world; grow; accumulate; abound.
   ītal - a bestowing in charity.
   īram - moisture; by meto, coolness, pleasantness; favour; affection.
   īr - two; drag
   īṉam (= iṉmai) - absence of, lack of.
   īṉ - bear, produce.
   ukir- nail (of finger or toe), claw, talon; finger, toe.
   uku - fall down, be shed, pour down.
   ucā(vu) - kindly sympathizing enquiry.
   uñaṟṟu - use effort.
   uṭaṅku - together with, altogether.
   uṭampu - body.
   uṭaṉ - a particle expressing co-existence; used as a post position.
   uṭu -put on, wear.
   uṭukkai - garment.
   uṭai - possessions, wealth ; break, burst, become broken, perish.
   uṭku - dread; reverence.
   uṇakku - make dry.
   uṇar - understand, feel the truth, appreciate.
   uṇ, uṇṇu - eat; drink; suck, imbibe; enjoy.
   uṇṭi - food.
   uṇṭu (uḷatu ) - it is.
   utavu - serve a purpose; help; be of use.
   utir - fall off; fall to the ground.
   upakāram - benefit.
   upāyam - stratagem, prudence.
   uppili - insipid.
   uppu - salt.
   umi - husk.
   umpar -the upper celestial world.
   ummai -the other, some other world or states.
   uyaṅku - afflict; suffer.
   uyarttu - exalt.
   uyal, uytal - escaping.
   uyir - life; being; sigh, breathe, waft.
   uy - escape; cause to go together; collect; direct, carry forth.
   uram, uraṉ - strength.
   uravu nīr - the rushing torrent.
   urāy - rub against
   urimai - possession.
   uru - form; beauty; much, great, vigorous.
   urumu - a thunderbolt.
   uruvu - form.
   urai - an explanation, commentary ; speak, say, tell; explain.
   [Syn. col, kūṟu, aṟai].
   ula - dry up; fail ; perish.
   ulakam - world.
   ulaṟu - be worn out.
   ulai - a forge; boiler; cooking pot.
   uva - be glad.
   uvari - the salt sea ; brackish water.
   uvar - brackishness, saltness; disgust; loathe.
   uḻa - suffer.
   uḻal - wander about.
   uḻavar, uḻavaṉ - cultivator.
   uḻavu -ploughing, cultivation.
   uḻu- plough.
   uḻai - place, refuge.
   uḷa, uḷḷa - they are, that are, that which are.
   uḷam, uḷḷam - mind, thought; breast.
   uḷar - persons existing.
   uḷi - a chisel.
   uḷai - tufted flowers.
   uḷ - place; inside, mind; exist.
   uḷḷu - think.
   uṟa - firmly, fastly.
   uṟaṅku - sleep
   uṟal - the befalling.
   uṟaḻ - suit, fit, appertain to.
   uṟiṉ - if it be befalling.
   uṟu - become; befall; befit, hap. [Opp. aṟu, iṟu]; real; mighty.
   uṟuti - stability, strength, certainty.
   uṟuttu - cause to hap.
   uṟuppu - member.
   uṟuvar - ascetics.
   uṟai - rain; burn; be pungent or rank; cause smart; reek of.
   uṟaippu - pungency, a copious penetrating rain.
   uṟṟavar -those who in sorrow seek their aid.
   ūkkam - strength, power; aim, plan; effort.
   ūkkal - acting vigorously.
   ūṭu - sulk, get impatient or angry with.
   ūṭṭu- feed, supply with food; dye.
   ūtiyam- profit, utility.
   ūraṉ- head-man.
   ūrāṇmai - magnanimity, munificence.
   ūr -town: cause to go, drive, ride on, crawl; circulate as sap.
   ūḻi - an aeon, age; eternity.
   ūḻ- what is in regular sequence, one after the other.
   ūṟu - affliction; ooze out, flow.
   ūṟṟu - spring of water; support.
   ūṉ - flesh.
   ūṉṟu- support on.
   eḵku - keenness; steel ; javelin.
   ekkālum - always, ever.
   eccam - What is left over or behind; what supplies a deficiency,
   complement.
   eccil - refuse of food, leavings; anything unclean.
   eñcu -survive, escape; remain over.
   eññāṉṟum - always.
   eṭu - acquire, gain a name, raise, lift up; support.
   etir - what is opposite to.
   em - our.
   emmai - us; what world or state or birth.
   eyiṟu - tooth.
   ey - send forth, emit; obtain; possess; assemble.
   eri - fire; consume.
   eruttam - the nape of the neck.
   eruttu - bend the neck as suppliants.
   eruvai - a kind of reed.
   el - night.
   ellai - bound, limit.
   evvam - pain, affliction.
   eḻili - a cloud.
   eḻil- beauty, youthful grace, youth.
   eḻu - seven; rise up, rise and wander forth; stand out.
   eḻuttu - a writing.
   eḷiya - easy.
   eḷḷu- despise, think lightly of.
   eṟi - strike; hurl, throw up.
   ēṟṟu (eṉ +tu) - It is of what sort?
   eṉiṉ - if.
   eṉaittu - how much, how many ?
   eṉ- me, my ; interrogative pron. 'what'; say.
   eṉpu - bone.
   eṉṟu - what day?
   eṉṟum - always, continually.
   eṉṉai - me; it is what?
   ēku - go.
   ēṅku - pine.
   ēṭṭai - poverty.
   ētilār - strangers, foes, neighbours.
   ētilār - strangeness; vicinity.
   ēmam - safety, protection ; intense delight.
   ēmuṟutal - sensual bewilderment.
   ēttu - extol, praise.
   ēntu - be raised, elevated.
   ēlāmai - impossibility, incongruity, declining a challenge.
   ēl - if; be fitting ; accept; ask alms; meet in battle.
   ēḻai - an ignorant wretch.
   ēṟu - rise, ascend, climb.
   ēṟṟu- lift up, put up into.
   ēṉai - other; how many; contrary to.
   ai, aintu- five.
   aintai - small mustard seed.
   aiyam - alms.
   aiyaṉ - father.
   o- be likewise.
   okkum - it will be equal, like.
   oṭṭu - cling to, unite [Opp. oruvu]
   oṇ, oṭ, oḷ - bright; good; beautiful ; wise.
   otuṅku - retire; recede.
   oppu - agree; be equal.
   oppuravu - befitting conduct.
   oru, oṉṟu - a, one, any.
   oruṅku - altogether, at once, completely.
   oruvar, oruvaṉ - (any) person.
   oruvu - shun; transcend;
   oli - sound; roar, resound.
   ol - be possible.
   olku - be shaken, fail.
   ollai - promptitude; swiftly.
   oḻi - leave ; shun; forsake ;depart; cease.
   oḻuku - flow on; pass; act; behave.
   oḻukkam - decorum, virtue.
   oḷi - glory ; splendour, light; hide.
   oḷ - bright; good; beautiful; wise.
   oṟu - punish.
   oṟkam - feebleness.
   oṉṟu - any (thing); suit, fit; join.
   oṉṉār - enemies.
   oō -interrogation: Ah! Oho!
   ōṅku - rise above.
   ōcai, ōlam - sound.
   ōṭu - earthern pot; run on.
   ōṭṭu - cause to run ; pass; spend.
   ōtam - billow, surf wave; ocean.
   ōtu - study.
   ōmpu - cherish.
   ōr - one; search out, ponder.
   ōvu - cease.
   kacaṭu - bitterness, disgust.
   kaṭa - cross over, pass.
   kaṭakam, kaṭaiyam - a bracelet.
   kaṭappāṭu - obligation; order.
   kaṭalam, kaṭal - sea.
   kaṭavatu - what is due, as much as is needful.
   kaṭaṉ - obligation, duty; debt.
   kaṭi - marriage; rebuke; renounce; scare away, over power and dispel.
   kaṭiñai - a beggar's bowl.
   kaṭippu - a drumstick.
   kaṭu - intense; evil; poison.
   kaṭuku - make haste.
   kaṭukku - enrage.
   kaṭum - harsh: fierce; [Opp. iṉ]
   kaṭai - shop or bazaar; last or lowest in state.
   kaṭaippiṭi - keep in mind.
   kaṭṭi - inspissated juice, lump of sugar.
   kaṭṭē - dwells on.
   kaṇakkāyar - teachers of the Vedas.
   kaṇamalai - a knot of hills.
   kaṇam - (in) troops.
   kaṇu - a joint or knot or eye in tree.
   kaṇ - eye.
   kaṇṇōṭu - be graciously disposed towards.
   kaṇpaṭu - slumber.
   katam - wrath.
   katir - ray.
   katuppu - a woman's hair.
   kappi - grain; coarse grits.
   kamaḻ - be diffused as odours.
   kamuku - the Betelnut palm.
   kammam - smith’s work.
   kayam - a low or base man; depth.
   kayal - any fish; a special fish.
   kara - conceal, refuse.
   kari - evidence, example.
   karu - black; eminence.
   karutu - regard.
   karumam, karmam - affair, business,
   karumpārk kaḻaṉi - hell.
   karuvi - instrument.
   karuṉai - anything fried.
   karai - a shore, bank.
   kala - mingle with, be intimate with
   kalaṅku - be confounded, perturbed.
   kalam, kalaṉ - a vessel, ship;
   kali - cry.
   kaluḻ - wail.
   kalai - a stag.
   kal - stone, rock; learn; excavate; bury.
   kalvi - learning.
   kavaṟu - a forked piece of palmyra wood, a fulcrum.
   kavaṟṟu - cause trouble to; distract.
   kavāṉ - lap, thigh.
   kavi - overarch; cover as a canopy.
   kavvu - seize with open jaws.
   kaḻal - fall or slip out.
   kaḻaṟu - urge.
   kaḻaṉi - a cultivated field.
   kaḻi - back-water, creek; much; pass off; spend time.
   kaḻuku - vulture.
   kaḷar - brackish soil.
   kaḷiṟu - elephant.
   kaḷai - remove, cut off.
   kaḷ - toddy; honey: steal; act treacherously.
   kaṟaṅku - sound.
   kaṟi - bite; eat.
   kaṟu - grow dark (with anger).
   kaṟai - darkness.
   kaṟpu - chastity; learning.
   kaṉam - weight; value.
   kaṉal - fire.
   kaṉi - ripe, sweet fruit; ripen.
   kaṉai - sound; roar.
   kaṉṟu - calf.
   kaṉṉi(yar) - virgin(s).
   kā - guard; hoard; restrain.
   kākkai - crow.
   kāṭu - a jungle ; burning ground.
   kāṭci - the vision and the faculty divine.
   kāṇam - wealth, gold, coin.
   kāṇ - see.
   kātam - an Indian league, about 5 English miles.
   kātal - affection; desire.
   kāmam - love; desire ; lust, sexual passion.
   kāyam - condiment, seasoning, hot spice.
   kār - blackness; a cloud: be acrid.
   kālāṭu - be active.
   kālu - discharge; vomit.
   kāḻ - hardness; core; kernel; ripe and solid wisdom.
   kāḷai - a young bullock; a youth; a bridegroom.
   kāṉa(ka)m, kāṉ - a desert.
   kāṉal - a grove on the seashore.
   kiṭa - lie down, remain, lie still.
   kiṭai - a kind of cork wood.
   kiḻamai - familiar friendship; propriety.
   kiḻi - tear; rend, pierce.
   kiḷai - branch; kindred grow, be amplified.
   kiḷḷu, kiḷ - pinch; dig out.
   kīḻ - under, sign of 7th case; by metonymy: low man.
   kuṭi - family, noble family.
   kuṭai - umbrella ; bend; hollow out.
   kuṇam, kuṇaṉ - quality; excellence.
   kuṇuṅkar - low people.
   kuṇṭu - depth.
   kuṇṭai - bullock.
   kutalaimai - folly.
   kutti, kuṟṟi - a log; having snatched.
   kuttu - peck, pierce, prick.
   kuppuṟu - rush away (fall head long.)
   kumpi - hell.
   kuy - spice, seasoning.
   kurampu - bank, limit.
   kuruku - a bird.
   kulam - family; race; caste.
   kuvaḷai - water-lily.
   kuḻampu - mud, slime.
   kuḻavi - early youth.
   kuḻuvu - unite, associate.
   kuḻai - ear jewel; tender leaves; wag, bend.
   kuṟaṭu - pincers, tongs.
   kuṟu - small.
   kuṟuku - approach.
   kuṟai - grow less; cut short; trim.
   kuṉṟu - diminish.
   kūttiyar - dancing girls.
   kūmpu - close as flowers.
   kūr - sharp; point.
   kūḻ - grain, rice; food.
   kūṟu - say, declare, proclaim.
   kūṟai - garment.
   kūṟṟu - death, Yaman.
   keṭu - perish, disappear.
   keḻu - become familiar, accustomed to.
   kēṇi - a temporary well; hole in the sand.
   kēḻ - hue.
   kēḷ - kindred.
   kēḷvi - traditional lore.
   kaiyuṟu - come to hand.
   kaiññāṉam - trifling, unreal wisdom.
   kaittu - what is in hand: means, property.
   kaippu - bitterness.
   koṭu - cruel, evil; give.
   koṭṭu - strike, beat a drum, gently manipulate.
   koṇmū - cloud.
   kompu - the bough of a tree.
   kommai - roundity.
   koy - pluck.
   kol - kill; an expletive emphasizing a statement or a question
   kollaṉ - a smith.
   koḻi - sift, examine.
   koḻuvu - fat.
   koḷ - take hold of, receive; seize; marry; hold in estimation
   koḷkai - tenet, principle.
   koḷḷu - horse-gram black and red.
   koṉ - hell; vain, useless.
   kō - king; string together.
   kōṅku - silk-cotton tree
   kōṭu - flexure, plait, fold; a branch; border; a curved tusk; bend,
   diverge from right.
   kōtu - adjust, trick out.
   kōtai - a flower wealth; by meto. a damsel.
   kōppu - provisions, food for a journey.
   kōl - a staff; arrow.
   kōḷ - contents; estimation; quality.
   kauvu - seize, clutch.
   cantaṉam - sandal-tree.
   camaḻ - suffer shame or distress.
   calam - trickery.
   cā - die.
   cākāṭu - cart.
   cākkāṭu - death.
   cāntu - fragrant unguents.
   cāyal - reflected image, form, beauty, excellence.
   cāy - grass; lean, fall.
   cāral - the side and slopes of a mountain range.
   cār - join, be close to, rely on, be dependant on.
   cāla - much.
   cāl - abound.
   cāṟṟu - announce.
   cāṉṟavar, cāṉṟōr - the excellent.
   cikai - course at a meal.
   citar - diffuse, spread.
   cital - white ant.
   ciral - the kingfisher.
   cillai - an utterly worthless woman.
   cival - a partridge.
   ciṟa - abound.
   ciṟappu - politeness, courtesy; excellence, splendour; renown.
   ciṉam - anger.
   cīr - position dignity; excellence, virtuous conduct.
   cuṭar - flame; sun.
   cuṭu - burn.
   cuṭṭukkōl - a poker.
   cura - gush forth, yield.
   curam - (a path through the) arid jungle or desert land.
   curumpu - a beetle, bee.
   curai - gourd.
   cuṟṟu - circuit, limit; surround, gird.
   cuṉai - tingle, itch.
   cūṭu - brand, scar; wearon.
   cūttiram - doctrine, formula, aphorism.
   cūl - scoop out.
   cūḻ - surround; deliberate, debate.
   ce - red, bright yellow, golden; by meto fiery; right, good.
   cempuṉal - the fresh, pure flood.
   cemmā - (in loco) exult.
   ceyir - wrath.
   cey -do, perform; make into; acquire, merit; profit, help,give.
   celavu-advancing to meet.
   cel - go, pass away, march by; reach; approach.
   celvam - wealth.
   ceḻu, ceḻum - rich, fertile, luxuriant.
   ceṟi - become dense ; stick close to, cling to, be attached, fasten on;
   hoard.
   ceṟu - afflict, restrain, be wrath with.
   cēkkai - nest.
   cēṇ - remote, far off.
   cēy - distance [Opp. aṇi].
   cēr - join, attach; acquire; fall to the lot of; come to attach;
   approach; gather.
   cērppaṉ - a chief whose capital is a sea-port.
   cēṟu - sweetness; mud; wet soil.
   col - a word; say, speak, utter.
   cōr - flow down, slip, omit.
   ñāyiṟu - the sun.
   ñālam - earth, world.
   ñāṉam - knowledge.
   ñemir - compress; bruise.
   takar - be broken, shattered.
   taku - fit, be becoming.
   takkār - the worthy.
   taṅku - abide, be stable.
   taṭi - flesh.
   taṭumāṟṟam - perplexity.
   taṇi - be relieved, grow cool, cause to diminish.
   taṇ - cool.
   taṇṇam - a funeral drum with one head.
   taṇṭu - staff; separate.
   tamar - kindred.
   tayaṅku - shine; wave; hang.
   talai - head; place, also a postposition of the'7th Case; what is chief
   extreme point.
   tavaci - an ascetic.
   tavu - fail; perish.
   taḻaṅku - roar.
   taḻāl - the support of.
   taḷir - a tender shoot.
   taḷai - bond.
   taṟi - a wooden post.
   tā - give, produce; bring; reflexive pronoun ‘self’.
   tāyattavar - the heirs.
   tār - garland; bear, endure.
   tāḷ - endurance, energy: a trunk or stem; foot.
   tāṟṟu - sifting, merely bandying words; sift, fan.
   tāṉai - a cloth, robe.
   tikaḻ - shine, glitter.
   tiṅkaḷ - moon.
   tiṇṇaṟivāḷar - people of firm, stedfast mind.
   tiri - change; wander about.
   tiru - wealth; Lakshmi: goddess of fortune.
   tirai - wave; (meto.) sea.
   tiḷai - gather thick round.
   tiṟaṉ - goodness.
   tiṉ - itch; eat.
   tī - fire; a spark; evil.
   tīṇṭu - touch.
   tīm - sweet.
   tīr - remove: get rid of; cure.
   tīrttam - a sacred stream.
   tīṟṟu - feed with the hand.
   tu, tuy - eat, enjoy.
   tukil - rich attire.
   tuccāri - profligate.
   tuñcu - die.
   tuṭi - a drum.
   tuṭai - wipe off, do away with.
   tuṇivu - decision, determination.
   tuṇai - assistance, help-meet; partner; measure; until.
   tuṇaimai - ability.
   tuttu - food.
   tuppu - power.
   tuppuravu - enjoyment; means of enjoyment.
   tuvai - spiced food.
   tuḻāy - mixed, mingled up.
   tuḷakku - agitation.
   tuṟavōr - ascetics.
   tuṟai - a haven
   tuṉ(ṉu) - gain; crowd.
   tūṅku - cling to, linger; hang on; slumber.
   tūṇi - a grain, measure.
   tūr - root
   tūṟṟu - publish abroad.
   terivu - understanding.
   terumaru - be perplexed.
   teruḷ - be clear.
   teḷi - understand.
   teḷḷitu - what is clear: accurate knowledge.
   teḷḷu - sift out, throw up; examine.
   teṟṟeṉa - immediately, certainly.
   tēcu - lustre.
   tēmā - sweet mango.
   tēm - sweetness; honey.
   tēy - waste away ; wane, grow less; pine away.
   tērai - a frog.
   tēr - enquire, discriminate.
   tērvu - comprehension
   tēṟu - be sure, know clearly; trust.
   tēṟṟam - certainty; assurance, confidence, accuracy.
   tai - penetrate.
   toku - collect, join.
   toṭarpu - associations, intimacy
   toṭi - a bracelet, bangle (meton.): 'a lady'.
   toṇṭu - slavery, a slave.
   tolaiccu - destroy.
   tol - ancient.
   tollai - antiquity.
   toḻu - leprosy; pay homage.
   toḻttai - slave girl.
   toṟum, tōṟum- every, whenever: a distributive suffix.
   tōy - blend with, touch; reach.
   tōḷ - shoulder, arm: person.
   tōṟṟam - light; appearance.
   naku - shine; smile, deride.
   nakai - a laugh.
   nacai - desire, hope, expectation.
   naccu - desire; lust after.
   naṭai - walk in life; position.
   naṭpu - friendship.
   nantu - grow; wax, die.
   nampu - desire.
   naya - love.
   nayam - goodness; wise decorum.
   narai - grey hair; age.
   nali - afflict.
   nal - good, goodly.
   navil - teach, learn; tell.
   navai - fault.
   naḷi - great.
   naḷ, naḷḷu- approach, join, contract friendship.
   naṟavu - fragrance
   naṉi - very, much.
   naṉṟi - a benefit.
   nāṭaṉ - lord of the land.
   nāṭu - a land; covet; seek out.
   nāṇ - modesty; shame.
   nār - cord, generally of vegetable fibre.
   nāvāy - a ship.
   nāṟu - yield perfume.
   nāṟṟam - fragrance.
   nāṉam - musk.
   nikar - one's inferior; equal.
   niccal, nittal - ever or assuredly.
   nirappu- poverty, beggary.
   nirayam - hell.
   nirai - herd, row, line.
   nilavu - abide
   nilai - state
   niṟam - colour (golden); the grow of youth.
   niṉai - ponder, reflect.
   niṉ - your
   nī - forsake; abandon.
   nīcar - base men
   nīr - water; goodness; nature.
   nīlam - blue (lotus) flower.
   nīṟu - ashes.
   nukar - eat; experience.
   nuṇ - refined; subtle.
   nutal - forehead.
   nūkku - shove, push.
   nūl - literature, book, a systematic treatise.
   nūṟu - a hundred; crush.
   neṭi - delay.
   neṭu - wide, vast.
   neytal - a water-flower.
   neṟi - way; conduct.
   neṟṟu - dried pulse in pods.
   nēr - comparison; rectitude; opposition.
   noyyatu - what is minute, transcendent.
   nō - feel pain; complain of.
   nōl - endure; do penance.
   paku - divide, share.
   pakaṭu - bullock.
   pakar - say, speak.
   pacalai - sallowness.
   pacum - green, young, fresh.
   pacai - cling to.
   pañci - cotton.
   paṭar - proceed; spread as a sore.
   paṭi - sink down.
   paṭu - suffer, fall; be, abide, befall: pertain to; concern.
   paṭai - instrument.
   paṭṭiṉam- a sea-port.
   paṇpu - nature: good qualities; excellence.
   paṇai - flourish, grow thick.
   paṇṭam - any vessel, thing, baggage.
   patakku - a dry measure of two, marakkāl of half tūṇi.
   pati - city.
   pattar - trough.
   pantam - real attachment.
   paya - yield.
   payaṉ - fruit; aid; yield.
   payiṉ - glue.
   para - spread; extol.
   parappu - table-land.
   pari - a horse; grieve over; love, desire; pull to pieces.
   paricu - dignity.
   parumam - a saddle, pillion.
   paruvam - season.
   pal - tooth; many
   palkālum - often.
   paḻai - old.
   paṟai - a drum.
   pākaṉ - an elephant - keeper.
   pāṇaṉ - minstrel.
   pāṇi - hand.
   pātiri - a trumpet-flower tree.
   pāttu - sharing.
   pāla - things that pertain to.
   pāṟṟu - what may be classed among things that.
   pāvai - A puppet: a lady.
   pāḻ - desolation.
   piṇi - disease, a bond, infliction.
   pitaṟṟu - blab, speak folly.
   pittar - fools.
   pirippu - mental perturbation.
   pilam - cave, mine.
   piḻai - fault; escape; miss; commit a fault.
   piṟa - other; be born.
   piṟaṅku - swell
   piṟaḻ - vary.
   piṟaṉ - one's neighbour.
   piṟitu - anything else.
   piṟai - the crescent moon.
   pīṭu - pride.
   pīḷ - embryo, germ.
   pukal - declare.
   pukkil - a permanent abode.
   puṭai - side; hypothesis.
   puṭaippeṇṭir - loose women.
   puṇar - join, unite.
   putavu - door.
   puttōṭu - a new pot.
   puri - desire; do, perform.
   purai - fault; resemble.
   pula - pout.
   pulam - a sense; sensation.
   pulaṉ - place; sense.
   pulai - silly.
   pul - mean; grass.
   pullāppuṉkōṭṭi - low heterodox school.
   pullu - join, agree : embrace.
   pulvāy - a kind of deer.
   puḻukkal - parboiled rice.
   puḷ - fowl, bird.
   puṟam - the back, or outside. [Opp. akam]
   puṉam - an upland plain fit for dry cultivation, and wooded.
   puṉal - a stream, torrent.
   puṉai - adorn.
   puṉ - mean.
   pūṇu, pūṇ - put on, assume the yoke or harness.
   pūḻai - wicket gate, smaller gate in a larger.
   pūḻ- a quail.
   peṭai - a hen; any female.
   peṇṇai - palmyrah tree.
   pey - rain, pour into; throw carelessly; serve up in.
   peyvaḷai - bracelets strung on.
   peruku - increase.
   perumitam - greatness.
   peṟu - obtain, gain, bear (a name), fetch (a price), gain, attain to,
   beget.
   peṟṟi - nature, acquired character.
   pēṭi - an hermaphrodite.
   pētai - a simpleton.
   pērāṇmai - manly excellence.
   pēṟu - gain; birth.
   paiya - by degrees, slowly, softly.
   po- perforate.
   poṅku- swell, foam, rage.
   poccā - forget.
   pottu - be hidden or stored up in, envelope.
   poykai - a tank.
   poru - fight; dash against.
   poruḷ - what belongs, property; reality; meaning.
   poli - be conspicuous; increase.
   poḻippu -an epitome in plain easy prose.
   poṟi - spot; writing; destiny.
   poṟai- patience.
   poṟṟoṭi - lady with golden bracelets.
   poṉṟu - die, perish.
   pōkam - enjoyment.
   pōttu - hollowness.
   pōr - war; envelope
   pōṟṟu - guard; cherish.
   mañcu - a cloud.
   maṭam - ignorance, stupidity, folly, artless simplicity.
   maṭu - kindle.
   maṇi - a gem
   maṇṭilam - sun
   maṇṭu - swarm; grow vehement; wax fierce
   matalai - support.
   mati - full moon; estimate ; esteem.
   matukai - strength.
   maturam - sweetness.
   mammar - delusion
   mayal - confusion.
   marattār- person irrational as tress.
   marapu - course; what is sanctioned by custom; line.
   maruṅku - side, limit.
   maruvu - embrace.
   maruḷ - be bewildered.
   malaṅku - an eel.
   mali - be full
   malku - abound, swell.
   mallal - abundance, fertility.
   maṟi - the young or any quadruped.
   maṟu - other: a spot, stain.
   maṟai - a secret.
   maṟṟu - but, besides.
   maṉai - a mansion, house
   maṉ - as a particle=indeed, forsooth
   maṉṟam - a hall of assemblage.
   maṉṉu - abide.
   mākkaḷ - base people; irrational beings
   mācu - fault, black.
   māṭam - a mansion
   māṇ - glory.
   mātar - woman; beauty.
   mātō - an expletive: O lady!
   māttirai - a moment; a limit.
   māntar - men, human beings.
   māy - die, disappear, perish.
   māri - rain
   mārkkam- way.
   māl (ceṅkaṇmāl) - Indra, king of celestial world.
   māṟu - a return, recompence.
   māṟṟār - foes.
   māṟṟu - deny.
   māṉam - honour.
   miku - abound.
   micai -(a case ending)=over, above on, upon; suck, feed upon.
   miṭi - affliction,
   miṭukku - tightness.
   miṭai - be closely packed, mixed up with.
   miṉṉu - lightning.
   mī- above.
   mīkkūṟṟam - eulogy, praise ; authority in words.
   mīṭṭu - in return.
   mītāṭu - move over surface.
   mītūru - throng, press on.
   mīṉ - a star, fish.
   muṭuku - hasten
   muṭai - ill odour.
   muṭṭikai - a jeweller's small hammer.
   mukampuku- come before one as a suppliant.
   muttam, muttu - a pearl.
   muttaraiyar -wealthy persons.
   muntiri -a minute fraction: (1/320)
   muyaṅku - embrace; cling to.
   muracam - drum.
   muraṇ - war.
   mullai - jasmine.
   muḻaṅku - sound out, thunder
   muḷai - a germ.
   muṟi - a tender shoot.
   muṟuval - tooth.
   muṟṟu - become accomplished; become mature, maturity.
   muṉi- detest, dislike.
   mū- grow old; three.
   mūkai - one dumb.
   mūḻai - a ladle.
   mey - body; truth, reality.
   melliyar - poor people.
   meṉmai - gentleness.
   mēlai - former.
   mēvu - love heartily.
   mēṉi - body.
   mai - a fault; a cloud.
   maintu - bewilderment.
   mokkuḷ - a bud; a bubble in water.
   moḻi - a word; speak.
   mōṭu - greatness [Opp. ēṭṭai]
   yā - tie, bind.
   yākkai - the body, the frame.
   yāṅkaṇum - everywhere.
   yāṟu - a river.
   vañcam - deceit.
   vaṭu - fault: ulcer, scar.
   vaṇṇam - way, manner.
   vaṇmai - liberality.
   vampalaṉ - a neighbour.
   vayaṅku - glitter, gleam.
   varaṉṟu- sweep things along.
   varuṇam - caste.
   varai - a mountain ; a bank; refuse, reject.
   valavai - a shameless person.
   vali - strength
   val, vaṟ, vaṉ - powerful, hard, cruel.
   valci - food.
   vallutal - is permissible.
   vallē - promptly.
   vavvu - snatch away.
   vaḻu - a slip, mistake, fault.
   vaḻutuṇai - brinjal.
   vaḻumpu - fat.
   vaḷam - abundance.
   vaḷi - whirlwind, wind.
   vaḷ - strong, sharp.
   vaṟa - grow dry, fail.
   vaṟiñar - paupers.
   vaṉappu - adornment, grace ; beauty.
   vākku - manner, appearance.
   vāti - afflict, coerce.
   vāymai- reality, truth.
   vāri - income.
   vāl - a tail; purity, whiteness.
   vāḷā - silently.
   vāḷ - light; a sword, bright keen weapon.
   vāṉakam - heavenly world.
   vicumpu - the sky.
   viṭar - a fissure, mountain cleft.
   viṇ,viṇṇu - the sky.
   vituppu - desire; eagerness, trepidation.
   vittakam - learning, wisdom.
   viya - wonder at,admire, praise.
   viraku- means, tact.
   viravu- commingle.
   vilaṅku- a boast, irrational being; stand off; fail.
   viḻu- excellent.
   viḻai - desire eagerly.
   viḷḷal - separation.
   viḷi- perish, cause; summon.
   viṟal - abundance; greatness.
   vī - perish.
   vīṭu - freedom, liberation, heaven.
   veḵku - desire.
   vekuḷu - be wroth.
   ventai - a cooked meal.
   vem - cruel.
   vempu - glow with heat.
   veyya - fiercely, hotly.
   veruku - a tom-cat.
   veṟpu - a hill.
   veṉṟi - victory.
   vē, vēku - burn.
   vēkam - wrath.
   vēcai - a wanton.
   vēṭkai - desire
   vētikai - a raised altar
   vēl - a weapon, lance.
   vēḻam - an elephant.
   vēḷāṇmai - liberality.
   vēḷ - desire, long fort.
   vai - place, put; abuse; store up.
   vaikal - day, daily.
   vaiku - tarry the night.
   vaiyam - the earth; a chariot.
   Our Popular English Publications
   Tirukkural
   This book contains metrical translation by Rev. Dr. G. U. Pope,
   translation in prose rendered by Rev. W. H. Drew and Rev. John Lazarus
   and also the versions of Mr. F. W. Ellis for some selected couplets.
   Rs. 10.00
   The Tamils Eighteen Hundred Years Ago
   V. Kanagasabhai, B.A.,B.L.
   This work sheds floods of light on the antiquities of the Tamil race,
   their Literature, Civilization, Commerce, Kingdoms, Foreign Trade etc.
   Rs. 8.00
   The Treatment of Nature in Sangam Literature
   Dr. M. Varadarajanar, M.A.M.O.L.,Ph.D.
   In this treatise, the author expounds the keen vision and deep insight
   of the authors of the Sangam classics, in respect of the study and
   elegant portrayal of the floras and faunas in all their serenity and
   romanticism in every discernible detail. Rs. 7.00
   Prof. P. Sundaram Pillai Commemoration Volume
   This volume contains articles in English and Tamil on philosophy,
   History and Tamil Literature etc. and critical study of
   characterisation contributed by eminent men of letters, for his
   immortal drama "Manonmaniam". Rs. 8.00
   Tamil India
   Prof. M. S. Purnalingam Pillai, B.A.,L.T.
   In this work, the versatile author discusses in detail the hoary Tamil
   Language and Literature, Trade, Polity, Arts, Science, Philosophy etc.,
   the study of which has, evidently, been neglected by the numerous
   oriental scholars of West and East drifted to the study of Sanscrit
   only. Rs. 5-00
   Tamil Wisdom
   Edward Jewitt Robinson
   This author traces the antiquity and splendour of Tamil language and
   literature and the wisdom derived from the epigrams in Tamil. He has
   rendered the following works in English: 24 chapters in Tirukkural,
   Muthuray, Athisudi, KonraiVenthan, Cabilar-Agaval and Mariyathai-Raman.
   Rs. 4-50
   Ten Tamil Ethics
   Prop T. B. Krishnaswami, M.A.,B.L.
   This book is the collection of English Translation in lucid style, of
   ten ethical poems in Tamil viz., Athisudi, Konrai-Venthan,
   Ulaga-Neethi, Vetri-Verkai, Muthurai, Nalvazhi, Nanneri,
   Nithi-Neri-Vilakkam, Neethi-Venba and Aranericharam. Rs. 4.00

References

   1. https://www.projectmadurai.org/
