                                   pm logo
                     ___________________________________

                   nammāḻvār aruḷiya tiruvāymoḻi
             (pākam 2 / pirapanta pācuraṅkaḷ 3343 - 3892)
                       kaucalyā hārṭ avarkaḷiṉ
                       āṅkila moḻipeyarppuṭaṉ
            tiruvAimozi of nammAlvAr -part 2 (pAcurams 3343-3892)
                    English Translation by Kausalya Hart
                     ___________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   Acknowledgement:
   Our Sincere thanks go to Dr. Kausalya Hart and Prof. George Hart of the
   Univ. of California, Berkeley, CA, USA for providing a soft copy of
   this work and for her permission to release the work as part of
   Project Madurai collections.
   Preparation of HTML and PDF versions: Dr. K. Kalyanasundaram, Lausanne,
   Switzerland.
   This file was last updated on 20 Sept. 2015
   © Project Madurai, 1998-2021.
   Project Madurai is an open, voluntary, worldwide initiative devoted to
   preparation
   of electronic texts of tamil literary works and to distribute them free
   on the Internet.
   Details of Project Madurai are available at the website
   https://www.projectmadurai.org/
   You are welcome to freely distribute this file, provided this header
   page is kept intact.
     __________________________________________________________________

              nammāḻvār aruḷiya tiruvāymoḻi (pākam 2)
       kaucalyā hārṭ avarkaḷiṉ āṅkila moḻipeyarppuṭaṉ
         Divyaprabandham - Thiruvaymozhi - Aaraam Pathu 3343 - 3452.

   tirucciṟṟampalam
   tiruvāymoḻi - āṟām pattu (mutal tirumoḻi, 3343-3353)
   tiruvaṇvaṇṭūrp perumāṉiṭam talaivi paṟavaikaḷait tūtuviṭal
   (tiruvaṇvaṇṭūr)
   3343 vaikal pūṅ kaḻivāy vantu mēyum kurukiṉaṅkāḷ
   cey koḷ cennel uyar tiruvaṇvaṇṭūr uṟaiyum
   kai koḷ cakkarattu eṉ kaṉivāyp perumāṉaik kaṇṭu
   kaikaḷ kūppi collīr viṉaiyāṭṭiyēṉ kātaṉmaiyē (1)
   3343. She says, "O kurugu birds,
   you come in the morning every day
   and wander in the flourishing backwaters.
   Go and see the lord whose mouth is as sweet as a fruit.
   He carries a discus and stays in Thiruvaṇvaṇḍur
   where the good paddy grows tall.
   Fold your hands and worship him
   and tell him that I suffer from love for him.
   I have done bad karma."
   3344 kātal meṉ peṭaiyōṭu uṭaṉ mēyum karu nārāy
   vēta vēḷvi oli muḻaṅkum taṇ tiruvaṇvaṇṭūr
   nātaṉ ñālam ellām uṇṭa nam perumāṉaik kaṇṭu
   pātam kaitoḻutu paṇiyīr aṭiyēṉ tiṟamē (2)
   3344. She says, "O large cranes,
   you wander here with your beloved mates.
   He swallowed all the worlds.
   Go and see our dear lord.
   He is the lord of cool Thiruvaṇvaṇḍur
   where the Vedas are recited loudly
   when the Brahmins perform sacrifices.
   Bow to his feet and tell him how I suffer from his love."
   3345 tiṟaṅkaḷ āki eṅkum ceykaḷ ūṭu uḻal puḷḷiṉaṅkāḷ
   ciṟanta celvam malku tiruvaṇvaṇṭūr uṟaiyum
   kaṟaṅku cakkarak kaik kaṉivāyp perumāṉaik kaṇṭu
   iṟaṅki nīr toḻutu paṇiyīr aṭiyēṉ iṭarē (3)
   3345. She says, "O flock of birds,
   you all come in a crowd
   and fly around everywhere on these fields.
   Go and see the dear god with a whirling discus in his hand.
   His mouth is as sweet as a fruit
   and he is the lord of beautiful Thiruvaṇvaṇḍur
   flourishing with wealth.
   Fly down to the ground, bow to him
   and tell him how I suffer with love for him.
   I am his slave."
   3346 iṭar il pōkam mūḻki iṇaintu āṭum maṭa aṉṉaṅkāḷ
   viṭal il vēta oli muḻaṅkum taṇ tiruvaṇvaṇṭūr
   kaṭaliṉ mēṉippirāṉ kaṇṇaṉai neṭumālaik kaṇṭu
   uṭalam naintu orutti urukum eṉṟu uṇarttumiṉē (4)
   3346. She says, "O lovely swans, you join your mates
   and plunge into happiness without any worries.
   Go and see the god Neḍumaal, the ocean-colored Kaṇṇan.
   He is the god of flourishing Thiruvaṇvaṇḍur
   where the sound of the Vedas spreads everywhere.
   Make him understand that there is a girl
   who suffers and melts with love for him."
   3347 uṇarttal ūṭal uṇarntu uṭaṉ mēyum maṭa aṉṉaṅkāḷ
   tiṇartta vaṇṭalkaḷmēl caṅku cērum tiruvaṇvaṇṭūr
   puṇartta pūn taṇ tuḻāy muṭi nam perumāṉaik kaṇṭu
   puṇartta kaiyiṉarāy aṭiyēṉukkum pōṟṟumiṉē (5)
   3347. She says, "O lovely swans,
   you know how it is to fight and make up with your mates
   and you wander together happily without being apart from them.
   Go and see our dear lord
   whose head is adorned with a cool beautiful thulasi garland.
   He stays in Thiruvaṇvaṇḍur
   where the waves bring conches and pile them on the shore.
   Go and bow to him, fold your hands and praise him for me also."
   3348 pōṟṟi yāṉ irantēṉ puṉṉaimēl uṟai pūṅ kuyilkāḷ
   cēṟṟil vāḷai tuḷḷum tiruvaṇvaṇṭūr uṟaiyum
   āṟṟal āḻi aṅkai amarar perumāṉaik kaṇṭu
   māṟṟam koṇṭaruḷīr maiyal tīrvatu oruvaṇṇamē (6)
   3348. She says, "O beautiful cuckoo birds.
   You stay in the punnai trees.
   I praise you and implore you.
   He is the highest god of the gods in the sky
   and he carries a powerful discus in his beautiful hands.
   He is the lord of divine Thiruvaṇvaṇḍur
   where the valai fish frolic in the muddy water.
   Go see him and tell him how I suffer from his love.
   Bring me his reply so my pain will go away."
   3349 oruvaṇṇam ceṉṟu pukku eṉakku oṉṟu urai oṇ kiḷiyē
   ceru oṇ pūm poḻil cūḻ cekkar vēlait tiruvaṇvaṇṭūr
   karu vaṇṇam ceyya vāy ceyya kaṇ ceyya kai ceyya kāl
   ceru oṇ cakkaram caṅku aṭaiyāḷam tiruntak kaṇṭē (7)
   3349. She says, "O lovely parrot, go directly, without wandering,
   and enter Thiruvaṇvaṇḍur where my god stays
   surrounded by shores with red sand
   and groves blooming with lovely flowers.
   He has a dark color, a red mouth, lovely eyes,
   reddish hands and beautiful feet
   and he carries in his hand a shining discus for fighting and a conch.
   That is how you can recognize him.
   Tell him that I love him."
   3350 tiruntak kaṇṭu eṉakku oṉṟu uraiyāy oṇ ciṟu pūvāy
   cerunti ñāḻal makiḻ puṉṉai cūḻ taṇ tiruvaṇvaṇṭūr
   perum taṇ tāmaraikkaṇ peru nīḷ muṭi nāl taṭantōḷ
   karun tiṇ mā mukil pōl tirumēṉi aṭikaḷaiyē (8)
   3350. She says, "O lovely little puvai bird,
   my god has large beautiful lotus eyes,
   long hair, four strong arms,
   and a dark divine body the color of thick clouds.
   He stays in rich Thiruvaṇvaṇḍur
   surrounded by mahizh, punnai, nyazhal and cherunti trees.
   See him, tell him of my love
   and then return and tell me what he has told you."
   3351 aṭikaḷ kaitoḻutu alarmēl acaiyum aṉṉaṅkāḷ
   viṭivai caṅku olikkum tiruvaṇvaṇṭūr uṟaiyum
   kaṭiya māyaṉ taṉṉai kaṇṇaṉai neṭumālaik kaṇṭu
   koṭiya valviṉaiyēṉ tiṟam kūṟumiṉ vēṟukoṇṭē (9)
   3351. She says, "O swans, lotus flowers are your home.
   The god, the tricky Maayan, Nedumaal, Kaṇṇan
   stays in Thiruvaṇvaṇḍur
   where conches are blown in the morning.
   I have terrible karma.
   Go, see the lord and worship him.
   Talk to him secretly and tell him how I am suffering."
   3352 vēṟukoṇṭu ummai yāṉ irantēṉ veṟi vaṇṭiṉaṅkāḷ
   tēṟu nīrp pampai vaṭapālait tiruvaṇvaṇṭūr
   māṟu il pōr arakkaṉ matiḷ nīṟu eḻac ceṟṟu ukanta
   ēṟu cēvakaṉārkku eṉṉaiyum uḷaḷ eṉmiṉkaḷē (10)
   3352. She says, "O swarm of bees
   flying around fragrant flowers,
   I beg you to do me favor.
   The god who destroyed the forts of Lanka
   of the Rakshasa king Ravana whom no enemies could subdue
   stays in Thiruvaṇvaṇḍur on the bank
   of the northern Pampa river that flows with abundant water.
   Go and tell that victorious hero that I am still alive."
   3353 miṉ koḷ cēr purinūl kuṟaḷ āy akal ñālam koṇṭa
   vaṉ kaḷvaṉ aṭimēl kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ coṉṉa
   paṇ koḷ āyirattuḷ ivai pattum tiruvaṇvaṇṭūrkku
   iṉkoḷ pāṭal vallār mataṉar miṉṉiṭai yavarkkē (11)
   3353. Sadagopan of Thirukuruhur composed
   a thousand poems with music on the god,
   the cunning thief who went to Mahabali as a dwarf
   adorned with a sacred shining thread
   and took over the wide world in two footsteps.
   If devotees learn and recite these ten musical pasurams
   on the god of Thiruvaṇvaṇḍur
   they will be like Kama for women with waists thin as lightning.
   --------------
   tiruvāymoḻi - āṟām pattu (iraṇṭām tirumoḻi, 3354-3364)
   talaivaṉ kālam tāḻttu varakkaṇṭa talaivi ūṭalkoṇṭu uraittal
   3354 miṉ iṭai maṭavārkaḷ niṉ aruḷ cūṭuvār muṉpu
   nāṉ atu añcuvaṉ
   maṉ uṭai ilaṅkai araṇ kāynta māyavaṉē
   uṉṉuṭaiya cuṇṭāyam nāṉ aṟivaṉ iṉi
   atukoṇṭu ceyvatu eṉ?
   eṉṉuṭaiya pantum kaḻalum tantu pōku nampī (1)
   3354. She says, "You are Maayavan
   and you burned the forts in Lanka of the king Ravaṇa.
   I am afraid when I see the girls
   whose waists are thin as lightning
   that you have cheated, loving them and leaving them.
   I know how you cheat.
   What are you going to do now to cheat me?
   O Nambi, give me back my ball and dice and then go."
   3355 pōku nampī uṉ tāmaraipurai kaṇ iṇaiyum
   cevvāy muṟuvalum
   ākulaṅkaḷ ceyya aḻitaṟkē nōṟṟōmē yām
   tōkai mā mayilārkaḷ niṉ aruḷ cūṭuvār
   cevi ōcai vaittu eḻa
   ākaḷ pōkaviṭṭu kuḻal ūtu pōyiruntē (2)
   3355. She says, "O Nambi, go away.
   Your lotus eyes, red mouth and smile bother us.
   We did so much tapas to love you
   but you just give us trouble.
   There are other girls, as lovely as peacocks,
   waiting to love you.
   They want to hear the sound of your flute.
   Go, graze your cows and play your flute
   and go to them. Please go away."
   3356 pōyiruntu niṉ puḷḷuvam aṟiyātavarkku urai
   nampī niṉ ceyya
   vāy iruṅ kaṉiyum kaṇkaḷum viparītam in nāḷ
   vēy irum taṭam tōḷiṉār it tiruvaruḷ
   peṟuvār evarkol
   mā irum kaṭalaik kaṭainta perumāṉālē? (3)
   3356. She says, "O Nambi, go and tell your lies
   to those who do not know how you cheat girls.
   Your big sweet fruit-like mouth and large eyes are dangerous!
   Who among the girls with round bamboo-like arms
   has enough tapas to receive your divine grace?
   You are the highest god and you churned the large milky ocean."
   3357 āliṉ nīḷ ilai ēḻ ulakum uṇṭu aṉṟu nī
   kiṭantāy uṉ māyaṅkaḷ
   mēlai vāṉavarum aṟiyār iṉi em paramē?
   vēliṉ nēr taṭam kaṇṇiṉār viḷaiyāṭu
   cūḻalaic cūḻavē niṉṟu
   kāli mēykka vallāy emmai nī kaḻaṟēlē (4)
   3357. She says, "You swallowed all the seven worlds
   and recline on a banyan leaf.
   Even the gods in the sky do not know your magic.
   O my highest lord,
   you are skilled at grazing cows
   while cowherd girls with large lovely spear-like eyes
   stay around you and play.
   Don’t try to play with me."
   3358 kaḻaṟēl nampī uṉ kaitavam maṇṇum viṇṇum
   naṉku aṟiyum tiṇ cakkara
   niḻaṟu tol paṭaiyāy uṉakku oṉṟu uṇarttuvaṉ nāṉ
   maḻaṟu tēṉ moḻiyārkaḷ niṉ aruḷ cūṭuvār
   maṉam vāṭi niṟka em
   kuḻaṟu pūvaiyoṭum kiḷiyōṭum kuḻakēlē (5)
   3358. She says, "O Nambi, don’t lie and cheat us.
   All the world and the sky know your tricks.
   You carry a powerful, ancient discus.
   I want to tell you something.
   The girls who speak like babies
   with their honey-like sweet soft words
   are upset and wait for your grace.
   Don’t play with our prattling puvai birds and our parrots."
   3359 kuḻaki eṅkaḷ kuḻamaṇaṉkoṇṭu kōyiṉmai ceytu
   kaṉmam oṉṟu illai
   paḻaki yām iruppōm paramē it tiru aruḷkaḷ?
   aḻakiyār iv ulakam mūṉṟukkum tēvimai
   ītakuvār palar uḷar
   kaḻakam ēṟēl nampī uṉakkum iḷaitē kaṉmamē (6)
   3359. She says, "There is no use making faces
   and doing tricks to make us think you love us.
   We have been with you for a long time.
   O highest god! Is this is way you give your grace?
   There are many lovely women
   as beautiful as goddesses of the three worlds
   and worthy of your love.
   Don’t play with us.
   It is all right to play like this because you are young."
   3360 kaṉmam aṉṟu eṅkaḷ kaiyil pāvai paṟippatu
   kaṭal ñālam uṇṭiṭṭa
   niṉmalā neṭiyāy uṉakkēlum piḻai piḻaiyē
   vaṉmamē colli emmai nī viḷaiyāṭuti atu
   kēṭkil eṉ aimmār
   taṉma pāvam eṉṉār oru nāṉṟu taṭi piṇakkē (7)
   3360. She says, "It is not right to grab the dolls
   that we hold in our hands to play with.
   O lord, you are faultless and you swallowed the world
   surrounded by oceans.
   O Neḍumaal, even if you do something wrong,
   mistakes are mistakes.
   You play with us and cheat us with your sweet words.
   If my brothers hear what you say
   they won’t consider whether it is right or not to act.
   They will take sticks and come to fight with you."
   3361 piṇakki yāvaiyum yāvarum piḻaiyāmal pētittum
   pētiyātatu ōr
   kaṇakku il kīrtti veḷḷak katir ñāṉa mūrttiyiṉāy
   iṇakki emmai em tōḻimār viḷaiyāṭap pōtumiṉ
   eṉṉap pōntōmai
   uṇakki nī vaḷaittāl eṉ collār ukavātavarē? (8)
   3361. She says, "Your form is like a flood of wisdom
   and you shine with endless fame.
   Without fail you create both creatures that are intelligent
   and creatures that are ignorant.
   My friends are calling me to go play with them
   but you come and attract me with your love
   so I can’t join them.
   If people see me with you, what will they think?"
   3362 ukavaiyāl neñcam uḷ uruki uṉ tāmarait
   taṭam kaṇ viḻikaḷiṉ
   aka valaip paṭuppāṉ aḻittāy uṉ tiruvaṭiyāl
   takavu ceytilai eṅkaḷ ciṟṟilum yām aṭu
   ciṟu cōṟum kaṇṭu niṉ
   muka oḷi tikaḻa muṟuval ceytu niṉṟilaiyē (9)
   3362. She says, "You attract us with your large lotus eyes
   and you want us to fall in love with you, melting in our hearts.
   You kicked and broke our small play houses with your divine feet.
   That wasn’t fair.
   You didn’t look at our play houses and the food we made for them.
   You didn’t just stand there with your shining face and smile at us,
   but you kicked over our small play houses.
   That wasn’t right."
   3363 niṉṟu ilaṅku muṭiyiṉāy irupattōr kāl
   aracu kaḷaikaṭṭa
   veṉṟi nīḷ maḻuvā viyaṉ ñālam muṉ paṭaittāy
   iṉṟu iv āyar kulattai vīṭu uyyat tōṉṟiya
   karumāṇikkac cuṭar
   niṉtaṉṉāl nalivē paṭuvōm eṉṟum āycciyōmē (10)
   3363. She says, "You have a shining crown.
   You carry a mazhu weapon
   that conquered and destroyed the kings of thirty-one generations.
   You created this wide world in ancient times.
   You are a bright dark diamond.
   You were born among the cowherd families to give them moksha,
   but see, you are naughty
   and you always give us cowherd girls trouble."
   3364 āycci ākiya aṉṉaiyāl aṉṟu veṇṇey
   vārttaiyuḷ cīṟṟa muṇṭu aḻu
   kūtta appaṉ taṉṉai kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ
   ēttiya tamiḻ mālai āyirattuḷ ivaiyum ōr pattu
   icai yoṭum
   nāttaṉṉāl navila uraippārkku illai nalkuravē (11)
   3364. Sadagopan of Thirukuruhur
   composed a thousand pasurams with music
   on the god, our father, the dancer
   who cried when his mother Yashoda, the cowherdess,
   was angry with him because he stole butter and tied him up.
   If devotees learn and recite with their tongues these ten pasurams
   they will have no troubles in their lives.
   ---------
   tiruvāymoḻi - āṟām pattu (mūṉṟām tirumoḻi, 3365-3375)
   tammai vacīkarittavaṉ sarvē#varaṉ eṉṟu aruḷic ceytal (tiruviṇṇakar)
   3365 nalkuravum celvum narakum cuvarkkamum āy
   velpakaiyum naṭpum viṭamum amutamum āy
   palvakaiyum paranta perumāṉ eṉṉai āḷvāṉai
   celvam malku kuṭit tiruviṇṇakark kaṇṭēṉē (1)
   3365. The god is poverty and wealth.
   He is heaven and hell.
   He is friend and enemy.
   He is nectar and poison.
   The lord is omnipresent.
   He rules me—I saw my lord in Thiruviṇṇagar
   where families live with abundant wealth.
   3366 kaṇṭa iṉpam tuṉpam kalakkaṅkaḷum tēṟṟamum āy
   taṇṭamum taṇmaiyum taḻalum niḻalum āy
   kaṇṭukōṭaṟku ariya perumāṉ eṉṉai āḷvāṉ ūr
   teṇ tiraip puṉal cūḻ tiruviṇṇakar nal nakarē (2)
   3366. He is joy and sorrow.
   He is confusion and clarity.
   He is anger and affection.
   He is heat and coolness.
   He is the lord no one can see.
   The god of beautiful Thiruviṇṇagar,
   surrounded by water with clear waves,
   is my ruler.
   3367 nakaramum nāṭukaḷum ñāṉamum mūṭamum āy
   nikar il cūḻ cuṭar āy iruḷ āy nilaṉ āy vicumpu āy
   cikara māṭaṅkaḷ cūḻ tiruviṇṇakar cērnta pirāṉ
   pukar koḷ kīrtti allāl illai yāvarkkum puṇṇiyamē (3)
   3367. He is countries and cities.
   He is wisdom and ignorance.
   He is unmatched enveloping light and darkness.
   He is the earth and sky.
   There is no puṇṇiyam for anyone
   without praising the fame of the lord
   of Thiruviṇṇagar surrounded by palaces.
   3368 puṇṇiyam pāvam puṇarcci pirivu eṉṟu ivai āy
   eṇṇam āy maṟappu āy uṇmai āy iṉmai āy allaṉ āy
   tiṇṇa māṭaṅkaḷ cūḻ tiruviṇṇakar cērnta pirāṉ
   kaṇṇaṉ iṉ aruḷē kaṇṭukoḷmiṉkaḷ kaitavamē? (4)
   3368. The god is virtue and sin.
   He is being together and separation.
   He is remembrance and forgetfulness.
   He is all that is in the world
   and he is all that is not in the world.
   He is existence, non-existence and nothing.
   Find the sweet grace of Kaṇṇan,
   our dear god of Thiruviṇṇagar
   surrounded by strong palaces,
   and take on yourself his cleverness.
   3369 kaitavam cemmai karumai veḷumaiyum āy
   mey poy iḷamai mutumai putumai paḻamaiyum āy
   ceyta tiṇ matiḷ cūḻ tiruviṇṇakar cērnta pirāṉ
   peyta kāvu kaṇṭīr perum tēvu uṭai mūvulakē (5)
   3369. He is bad and good.
   He is black and white.
   He is truth and falsehood.
   He is youth and age.
   He is new and old.
   Our god stays in Thiruviṇṇagar surrounded by strong walls.
   He is the great god of the three worlds,
   and see, he will protect all the worlds.
   3370 mūvulakaṅkaḷum āy allaṉ āy ukappu āy muṉivu āy
   pūvil vāḻ makaḷ āy tavvai āy pukaḻ āy paḻi āy
   tēvar mēvit toḻum tiruviṇṇakar cērnta pirāṉ
   pāviyēṉ maṉattē uṟaikiṉṟa parañcuṭarē (6)
   3370. He is all the three worlds and he is not them.
   He is happiness and hatred.
   He is Lakshmi, the goddess on a lotus.
   He is the inauspicious goddess.
   He is fame and he is infamy.
   The gods in the sky come to worship
   the lord of Thiruvinnagar, the highest light,
   and he stays in this sinner’s mind.
   3371 param cuṭar uṭampu āy aḻukkup patitta uṭampu āy
   karantum tōṉṟiyum niṉṟum kaitavaṅkaḷ ceytum viṇṇōr
   ciraṅkaḷāl vaṇaṅkum tiruviṇṇakar cērnta pirāṉ
   varam koḷ pātam allāl illai yāvarkkum vaṉ caraṇē (7)
   3371. He takes shining divine forms.
   He takes forms that are unclean.
   He hides himself.
   He presents himself to his devotees .
   He stays in the world.
   He does naughty deeds.
   The gods from the sky come and worship,
   bowing their heads to our god of Thiruviṇṇagar.
   There is no refuge for anyone but the feet of the lord
   who give boons to all.
   3372 vaṉ caraṇ curarkku āy acurarkku vem kūṟṟamum āy
   taṉ caraṇ niḻaṟkīḻ ulakam vaittum vaiyātum
   teṉ caraṇ ticaikkut tiruviṇṇakar cērnta pirāṉ
   eṉ caraṇ eṉ kaṇṇaṉ eṉṉai āḷuṭai eṉ appaṉē (8)
   3372. He gives refuge to the gods.
   He is cruel Yama for the Asurans.
   He keeps good people beneath his feet and protects them
   but he does not protect those who are bad.
   Our lord stays in Thiruviṇṇagar
   and protect the southern direction.
   He is my father and he rules me.
   My god Kanṇan is my refuge.
   3373 eṉ appaṉ eṉakku āy ikuḷ āy eṉṉaip peṟṟavaḷ āy
   poṉ appaṉ maṇi appaṉ muttu appaṉ aṉ appaṉum āy
   miṉṉap poṉ matiḷ cūḻ tiruviṇṇakar cērnta appaṉ
   taṉ oppār il appaṉ tantaṉaṉ taṉa tāḷ niḻalē (9)
   3373. He is my father.
   He is my friend.
   He is the mother who gave birth to me.
   He my father is precious as gold, diamonds and pearl.
   He stays in Thiruviṇṇagar
   surrounded with shining golden walls.
   He, the matchless god, granted me refuge beneath his feet.
   3374 niḻal veyyil ciṟumai perumai kuṟumai neṭumaiyum āy
   cuḻalvaṉa niṟpaṉa maṟṟum āy avai allaṉum āy
   maḻalai vāy vaṇṭu vāḻ tiruviṇṇakar maṉṉu pirāṉ
   kaḻalkaḷ aṉṟi maṟṟōr kaḷaikaṇ ilam kāṇmiṉkaḷē (10)
   3374. He is shadow and sunlight.
   He is small and great.
   He is short and tall.
   He is those things that move and those that are still,
   and he is everything other than those things.
   He stays always in Thiruviṇṇagar
   where the bees sing as sweetly as babies.
   I have no other refuge
   than his feet ornamented with anklets.
   3375 kāṇmiṉkaḷ ulakīr eṉṟu kaṇmukappē nimirnta
   tāḷ iṇaiyaṉ taṉṉaik kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ coṉṉa
   āṇai āyirattut tiruviṇṇakarp pattum vallār
   kōṇai iṉṟi viṇṇōrkku eṉṟum āvar kuravarkaḷē (11)
   3375. Sadagopan of Thirukuruhur
   composed a thousand poems on the lord
   who measured the world and the sky with his two feet
   and said, "O people of the world, see my feet!"
   If devotees learn and recite these ten pasurams on Thiruviṇṇagar
   they will become the gurus of the gods in the sky.
   ---------
   tiruvāymoḻi - āṟām pattu (nāṉkām tirumoḻi, 3376-3386)
   kaṇṇaṉatu avatārac ceyalkaḷaip pēcap peṟṟamaikkuk kaḷittal
   3376 kuravai āycciyarōṭu kōttatum
   kuṉṟam oṉṟu ēntiyatum
   uravu nīrp poykai nākam kāyntatum
   uṭpaṭa maṟṟum pala
   aravil paḷḷip pirāṉ taṉ māya
   viṉaikaḷaiyē alaṟṟi
   iravum naṉ pakalum tavirkilaṉ
   eṉṉa kuṟai eṉakkē? (1)
   3376. Our lord danced the kuravai dance with the cowherd girls.
   He carried Govardhana mountain to protect the cows.
   He danced on the head of the snake Kalingan
   in the pond with roaring water.
   The lord sleeps on a snake bed and I prattle night and day,
   telling all his magic deeds without stopping.
   What bad things can happen to me from now on?
   3377 kēyat tīm kuḻal ūtiṟṟum nirai mēyttatum
   keṇṭai oṇ kaṇ
   vācap pūṅ kuḻal piṉṉai tōḷkaḷ
   maṇantatum maṟṟum pala
   māyak kōlap pirāṉ taṉ ceykai
   niṉaintu maṉam kuḻaintu
   nēyattōṭu kaḻinta pōtu eṉakku
   ev ulakam nikarē? (2)
   3376. Our lord danced the kuravai dance with the cowherd girls.
   He carried Govardhana mountain to protect the cows.
   He danced on the head of the snake Kalingan
   in the pond with roaring water.
   The lord sleeps on a snake bed and I prattle night and day,
   telling all his magic deeds without stopping.
   What bad things can happen to me from now on?
   3378 nikar il mallaraic ceṟṟatum nirai mēyttatum
   nīḷ neṭum kaic
   cikara mā kaḷiṟu aṭṭatum ivai
   pōlvaṉavum piṟavum
   pukarkoḷ cōtip pirāṉ taṉ ceykai
   niṉaintu pulampi eṉṟum
   nukara vaikal vaikappeṟṟēṉ eṉakku
   eṉ iṉi nōvatuvē? (3)
   3378. He killed the matchless heroic wrestlers.
   He grazed the herd of cows.
   He killed the angry long-trunked elephant Kuvalayabeeḍam.
   I think constantly and prattle about these deeds
   and others like them of the radiant lord praised by all.
   He gives his grace to me every day.
   What suffering can there be for me now?
   3379 nōva āycci uralōṭu ārkka iraṅkiṟṟum
   vañcap peṇṇaic
   cāvap pāl uṇṭatum ūr cakaṭam
   iṟac cāṭiyatum
   tēvak kōlap pirāṉ taṉ ceykai
   niṉaintu maṉam kuḻaintu
   mēvak kālaṅkaḷ kūṭiṉēṉ eṉakku
   eṉ iṉi vēṇṭuvatē? (4)
   3379. He cried when Yashoda tied him to a mortar.
   He drank the milk of the cheating devil Puthana.
   Sakaṭasuran came in the form of a cart and he kicked him.
   When I think of all the heroic deeds of the beautiful god of gods
   my heart melts and is constantly with the god.
   What do I want any more?
   3380 vēṇṭit tēvar irakka vantu piṟantatum
   vīṅku iruḷvāy
   pūṇṭu aṉṟu aṉṉaip pulampa pōy aṅku ōr
   āykkulam pukkatum
   kāṇṭal iṉṟi vaḷarntu kañcaṉait tuñca
   vañcam ceytatum
   īṇṭu nāṉ alaṟṟappeṟṟēṉ eṉakku
   eṉṉa ikal uḷatē? (5)
   3380. He was born as Kaṇṇan
   when the gods asked him to come and destroy the Rakshasas.
   While his mother suffered and cried
   his father Vasudeva took him in the darkness
   to a cowherd village where he was raised.
   Kamsan did not know Kaṇṇan was growing up in the cowherd village
   and that his tricks would destroy him.
   I prattle on thinking of all his heroic deeds.
   How could there be any enemy for me?
   3381 ikal koḷ puḷḷaip piḷantatum imil
   ēṟukaḷ ceṟṟatuvum
   uyar koḷ cōlaik kuruntu ocittatum
   uṭpaṭa maṟṟum pala
   akal koḷ vaiyam aḷanta māyaṉ eṉ
   appaṉ taṉ māyaṅkaḷē
   pakal irāp paravap peṟṟēṉ eṉakku
   eṉṉa maṉap parippē? (6)
   3381. When an Asuran came as his enemy in the form of a bird
   he split open its beak and killed it.
   He killed seven bulls to marry Nappinnai.
   He broke the kurundam trees that grew tall in the groves.
   He is the Maayan who measured the wide world at the sacrifice of
   Mahabali.
   Night and day I praise the magical deeds of my father the god.
   I will have no trouble in my heart.
   3382 maṉap parippōṭu aḻukku māṉiṭa
   cātiyil tāṉpiṟantu
   taṉakku vēṇṭu urukkoṇṭu tāṉ taṉa
   cīṟṟattiṉai muṭikkum
   puṉat tuḻāy muṭi mālai mārpaṉ eṉ
   appaṉ taṉ māyaṅkaḷē
   niṉaikkum neñcu uṭaiyēṉ eṉakku
   iṉi yār nikar nīḷ nilattē? (7)
   3382. He showed his compassion by being born
   to help the evil people of the earth.
   He took any form he wished.
   My father, adorned with a forest thulasi garland on his chest,
   came to the earth because he was angry at the evil Rakshasas.
   I think constantly of the magical deeds of my father, the lord.
   Who is there as fortunate as I?
   3383 nīḷ nilattoṭu vāṉ viyappa niṟai perum
   pōrkaḷ ceytu
   vāṇaṉ āyiram tōḷ tuṇittatum
   uṭpaṭa maṟṟum pala
   māṇi āy nilam koṇṭa māyaṉ eṉ
   appaṉ taṉ māyaṅkaḷē
   kāṇum neñcu uṭaiyēṉ eṉakku
   iṉi eṉṉa kalakkam uṇṭē? (8)
   3383. He fought many terrific battles, amazing the world.
   He cut off the thousand arms of Vaṇasuran.
   He measured the earth and sky at the sacrifice of Mahabali.
   I know all the magical deeds of my father, the Maayan
   and there is no distress in my mind anymore.
   3384 kalakka ēḻ kaṭal ēḻ malai ulaku ēḻum
   kaḻiyak kaṭāy
   ulakkat tērkoṭu ceṉṟa māyamum
   uṭpaṭa maṟṟum pala
   valakkai āḻi iṭakkaic caṅkam
   ivai uṭai mālvaṇṇaṉai
   malakkum nā uṭaiyēṟku māṟu uḷatō
   im maṇṇiṉ micaiyē? (9)
   3384. He swallowed all the seven seas, the seven mountains
   and the seven worlds.
   He drove the chariot for Arjuna with his maayam.
   He carries the discus in his right hand and the conch in his left,
   I prattle, praising the dark-colored god with my tongue
   and that is all I want to do.
   3385 maṇmicaip perum pāram nīṅka ōr
   pārata mā perum pōr
   paṇṇi māyaṅkaḷ ceytu cēṉaiyaip pāḻpaṭa
   nūṟṟiṭṭup pōy
   viṇmicait taṉa tāmamē puka mēviya
   cōti taṉ tāḷ
   naṇṇi nāṉ vaṇaṅkappeṟṟēṉ eṉakku
   ār piṟar nāyakarē? (10)
   3385. He made Arjuna fight in the terrible Bharatha war.
   He performed many magic deeds and destroyed the Kaurava army.
   He is a bright light in the sky and he wears the garland of victory.
   I approached and worshiped him.
   Who could be my lord in this world but he?
   3386 nāyakaṉ muḻu ēḻ ulakukkum
   āy muḻu ēḻ ulakum taṉ
   vāyakam puka vaittu umiḻntu
   avai āy avai allaṉum ām
   kēcavaṉ aṭi iṇaimicaik
   kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ coṉṉa
   tūya āyirattu ip pattāl
   pattar āvar tuvaḷ iṉṟiyē (11)
   3386. Sagagopan of Thirukuruhur worshiped the feet
   of the lord Kesavan and composed a thousand poems.
   The lord of all the seven worlds swallowed them all,
   kept them in his stomach and at end of the world
   he spit them out from his mouth.
   If devotees learn and recite these ten pasurams
   they will become faultless devotees of the god.
   -----------------
   tiruvāymoḻi - āṟām pattu (aintām tirumoḻi, 3387-3397)
   tōḻi tāymārai nōkkik kūṟutal (tolaivillimaṅkalam)
   3387 tuvaḷ il mā maṇi māṭam ōṅku
   tolaivillimaṅkalam toḻum
   ivaḷai nīr iṉi aṉṉaimīr umakku
   ācai illai viṭumiṉō
   tavaḷa oṇ caṅku cakkaram eṉṟum
   tāmarait taṭam kaṇ eṉṟum
   kuvaḷai oṇ malark kaṇkaḷ nīr malka
   niṉṟu niṉṟu kumuṟumē (1)
   3387. Her friends say,
   "O mothers! She worships Tholaivillimangalam
   filled with palaces studded with bright faultless diamonds.
   O mothers, you took her to Tholaivillimangalam
   and brought her back
   and now she has fallen in love with the god and says,
   ‘He carries a shining conch that gives birth to pearls,
   and a discus in his hands.
   His big eyes are beautiful as lotuses.’
   Her eyes, as beautiful as kuvalai flowers, are filled with tears
   and she stands and cries."
   3388 kumuṟum ōcai viḻavu olit
   tolaivillimaṅkalam koṇṭupukku
   amuta meṉ moḻiyāḷai nīr umakku
   ācai iṉṟi akaṟṟiṉīr
   timir koṇṭāl ottu niṟkum maṟṟu ivaḷ
   tēva tēvapirāṉ eṉṟē
   nimiyum vāyoṭu kaṇkaḷ nīr malka
   nekku ocintu karaiyumē (2)
   3388. Her friends say,
   "O mothers, you took your daughter with soft words sweet as nectar
   to Tholaivillimangalam where the noise of festivals is loud
   and you brought her back.
   She has fallen in love with the god.
   She stands, unable to do anything,
   and she says, ‘You are the god of gods!’
   Her eyes are filled with tears and she melts with love for him."
   3389 karai koḷ paim poḻil taṇ paṇait
   tolaivillimaṅkalam koṇṭupukku
   urai koḷ iṉ moḻiyāḷai nīr umakku
   ācai iṉṟi akaṟṟiṉīr
   tirai koḷ pauvattuc cērntatum
   ticai ñālam tāvi aḷantatum
   niraikaḷ mēyttatumē pitaṟṟi
   neṭum kaṇ nīr malka niṟkumē (3)
   3389. Her friends say,
   "O mothers, your daughter’s words are sweet as nectar.
   You took her to Thirutholaivillimangalam
   on the banks of the Thamiraparaṇi river,
   with flourishing groves and cool paddy fields,
   and you brought her back
   even though she didn’t want to return.
   She says, ‘He sleeps on the milky ocean roaring with waves.
   He measured the earth and the sky.
   He grazes the cows.’
   She prattles on and her long eyes are filled with tears."
   3390 niṟkum nālmaṟaivāṇar vāḻ
   tolaivillimaṅkalam kaṇṭapiṉ
   aṟkam oṉṟum aṟa uṟāḷ malintāḷ
   kaṇṭīr ivaḷ aṉṉaimīr
   kaṟkum kalvi ellām karuṅ kaṭal
   vaṇṇaṉ kaṇṇa pirāṉ eṉṟē
   oṟkam oṉṟum ilaḷ ukantu ukantu
   uḷ makiḻntu kuḻaiyumē (4)
   3390. Her friends say,
   "O mothers, look.
   You took her to Thirutholaivillimangalam
   where Brahmins who know all four Vedas live.
   After she returned she has forgotten how to be shy.
   She doesn’t want to listen to you but says,
   ‘All that I have learned and know is about the dark-colored Kaṇṇan.’
   She repeats this again and again, never growing tired.
   In her heart she is happy and melts for him."
   3391 kuḻaiyum vāḷ mukattu ēḻaiyait
   tolaivillimaṅkalam koṇṭupukku
   iḻai koḷ cōtic centāmaraik kaṇ
   pirāṉ iruntamai kāṭṭiṉīr
   maḻai peytāl okkum kaṇṇa nīriṉoṭu
   aṉṟu toṭṭum maiyāntu ivaḷ
   nuḻaiyum cintaiyaḷ aṉṉaimīr toḻum
   at ticai uṟṟu nōkkiyē (5)
   3391. Her friends say,
   "O mothers, your innocent daughter has a gentle shining face.
   You took her to Tholaivillimangalam
   and showed her the beautiful lotus-eyed lord
   adorned with shining ornaments.
   Her eyes shed tears like rain.
   Her mind is fascinated with the qualities of the god
   and thinks only of him.
   She constantly looks in the direction where god stays
   and worships him."
   3392 nōkkum pakkam ellām karumpoṭu
   cennel ōṅku centāmarai
   vāykkum taṇ porunal vaṭakarai
   vaṇ tolaivillimaṅkalam
   nōkkumēl at ticai allāl maṟu
   nōkku ilaḷ vaikal nāḷtoṟum
   vāykkoḷ vācakamum maṇivaṇṇaṉ
   nāmamē ivaḷ aṉṉaimīr! (6)
   3391. Her friends say,
   "O mothers, your innocent daughter has a gentle shining face.
   You took her to Tholaivillimangalam
   and showed her the beautiful lotus-eyed lord
   adorned with shining ornaments.
   Her eyes shed tears like rain.
   Her mind is fascinated with the qualities of the god
   and thinks only of him.
   She constantly looks in the direction where god stays
   and worships him."
   3393 aṉṉaimīr aṇi mā mayil ciṟumāṉ
   ivaḷ nammaik kaivalintu
   eṉṉa vārttaiyum kēṭkuṟāḷ
   tolaivillimaṅkalam eṉṟu allāl
   muṉṉam nōṟṟa vitikolō? mukil
   vaṇṇaṉ māyam kolō? avaṉ
   ciṉṉamum tirunāmamum ivaḷ
   vāyaṉakaḷ tiruntavē (7)
   3393. Her friends say,
   "O mothers, your daughter is as beautiful as a peacock
   and innocent as a small deer.
   She refuses to listen to anything we say
   but only repeats the word ‘Tholaivillimangalam.’
   Is this the fruit of the tapas that she did in her last birth
   or is it the magic of the cloud-colored god?
   She constantly speaks of his divine name
   and his discus, sword, club and conch.
   Her mouth can only say the god’s names clearly."
   3394 tiruntu vētamum vēḷviyum
   tiru mā makaḷirum tām malintu
   iruntu vāḻ porunal vaṭakarai
   vaṇ tolaivillimaṅkalam
   karun taṭam kaṇṇi kaitoḻuta an nāḷ
   toṭaṅki in nāḷtoṟum
   iruntu iruntu aravintalōcaṉa
   eṉṟu eṉṟē naintu iraṅkumē (8)
   3393. Her friends say,
   "O mothers, your daughter is as beautiful as a peacock
   and innocent as a small deer.
   She refuses to listen to anything we say
   but only repeats the word ‘Tholaivillimangalam.’
   Is this the fruit of the tapas that she did in her last birth
   or is it the magic of the cloud-colored god?
   She constantly speaks of his divine name
   and his discus, sword, club and conch.
   Her mouth can only say the god’s names clearly."
   3395 iraṅki nāḷtoṟum vāyverīi ivaḷ
   kaṇṇa nīrkaḷ alamara
   maraṅkaḷum iraṅkum vakai
   maṇivaṇṇavō eṉṟu kūvumāl
   turaṅkam vāy piḷantāṉ uṟai
   tolaivillimaṅkalam eṉṟu taṉ
   karaṅkaḷ kūppit toḻum av ūrt
   tirunāmam kaṟṟataṉ piṉṉaiyē (9)
   3395. Her friends say,
   "O mothers, she worries every day
   and is afraid to say anything.
   Her eyes are filled with tears.
   When she calls out saying, ‘O dark diamond-colored god!’
   even the trees feel sorry for her.
   Ever since she learned the divine name of the city
   she has worshiped the god folding her hands
   and said, ‘That is Tholaivillimangalam of the god
   who split open the Asuran’s mouth
   when he came in the form of a horse.’"
   3396 piṉṉaikol nila mā makaḷkol
   tirumakaḷkol piṟantiṭṭāḷ?
   eṉṉa māyamkolō ivaḷ neṭumāl
   eṉṟē niṉṟu kūvumāl
   muṉṉi vantu avaṉ niṉṟu iruntu
   uṟaiyum tolaivillimaṅkalam
   ceṉṉiyāl vaṇaṅkum av ūrt
   tirunāmam kēṭpatu cintaiyē. (10)
   3396. Her friends say,
   "O mothers, is she Nappinnai?
   Is she the great earth goddess?
   Is she beautiful Lakshmi?
   She was born on this earth—what magic is this?
   She calls to him loudly, ‘O Neḍumaal!’
   Her heart wants to hear the divine names of the lord
   of Tholaivillimangalam
   and she worships him bowing her head."
   3397 cintaiyālum collālum
   ceykaiyiṉālum tēva pirāṉaiyē
   tantai tāy eṉṟu aṭainta
   vaṇ kurukūravar caṭakōpaṉ
   muntai āyirattuḷ ivai tolai
   villimaṅkalattaic coṉṉa
   centamiḻp pattum vallār
   aṭimaiceyvār tirumālukkē (11)
   3397. Sadagopan of rich Thirukuruhur
   worships the god with his thoughts, words and deeds.
   He praised the god, his father and mother.
   He composed a thousand poems
   and among them ten praise the god in Tholaivillimangalam.
   If devotees learn and recite these ten pure Tamil pasurams
   they will become the devotees of Thirumaal.
   -----------------
   tiruvāymoḻi - āṟām pattu (āṟām tirumoḻi, 3398-3408)
   talaivaṉatu pirivāl varuntum talaimakaḷaik kuṟittut tāy iraṅkutal
   3398 mālukku vaiyam aḷanta maṇāḷaṟku
   nīlak karu niṟa mēka niyāyaṟku
   kōlac centāmaraik kaṇṇaṟku eṉ koṅku alar
   ēlak kuḻali iḻantatu caṅkē (1)
   3398. Her mother says,
   "The god measured the world at Mahabali’s sacrifice.
   My daughter is decorated with lovely flowers
   dripping with honey in her hair.
   She has grown thin and her conch bangles have become loose
   and fallen from her arms
   because she loves the beautiful god, the lotus-eyed Kaṇṇan,
   the dark cloud-colored Maal."
   3399 caṅku vil vāḷ taṇṭu cakkarak kaiyaṟku
   ceṅkaṉivāyc ceyya tāmaraik kaṇṇaṟku
   koṅku alar taṇ am tuḻāy muṭiyāṉukku eṉ
   maṅkai iḻantatu māmai niṟamē (2)
   3399. Her mother says,
   "The god carries in his hands
   a conch, bow, sword, club and a discus.
   His mouth is sweet as a fruit.
   His eyes are beautiful as lotuses,
   and he is adorned with a cool thulasi garland
   blooming with flowers that drip honey.
   My daughter has lost her dark color and become pale
   because she is in love with him."
   3400 niṟam kariyāṉukku nīṭu ulaku uṇṭa
   tiṟam kiḷar vāyc ciṟuk kaḷvaṉ avaṟku
   kaṟaṅkiya cakkarak kaiyavaṉukku eṉ
   piṟaṅku irum kūntal iḻantatu pīṭē (3)
   3400. Her mother says,
   "He, the dark god, the little thief who stole butter,
   swallowed the wide world with his beautiful red mouth.
   He has a whirling discus in his hand.
   My girl with long beautiful hair
   has lost her pride because she loves the dark-colored god."
   3401 pīṭu uṭai nāṉmukaṉaip paṭaittāṉukku
   māṭu uṭai vaiyam aḷanta maṇāḷaṟku
   nāṭu uṭai maṉṉarkkut tūtu cel nampikku eṉ
   pāṭu uṭai alkul iḻantatu paṇpē (4)
   3401. He created the famous Nanmuhan.
   He measured the flourishing world
   and went as a messenger to the Kauravas for the Pandavas
   to ask for their lands.
   My daughter has lost the beauty of her wide hips
   because she loves Nambi.
   3402 paṇpu uṭai vētam payanta paraṉukku
   maṇ purai vaiyam iṭanta varākaṟku
   teṇ puṉal paḷḷi em tēva pirāṉukku eṉ
   kaṇpuṉai kōtai iḻantatu kaṟpē (5)
   3402. He gave the marvelous Vedas to the world.
   He came as a boar and split open the world
   that is filled with sand.
   He, the lord of the gods, sleeps on a bed on the clear ocean.
   My daughter is precious as my eyes.
   She has lost her chastity
   because she loves the highest god of gods
   3403 kaṟpakak kā aṉa nal pala tōḷaṟku
   poṉ cuṭark kuṉṟu aṉṉa pūn taṇ muṭiyaṟku
   nal pala tāmarai nāḷ malark kaiyaṟku eṉ
   vil puruvakkoṭi tōṟṟatu meyyē (6)
   3403. His many arms are like the branches of the Karpaga garden.
   He wears a beautiful crown like a shining hill.
   He has lovely lotus-like hands.
   It is true that my lovely daughter
   who has bow-shaped eyebrows has lost her beauty.
   3404 mey amar pal kalaṉ naṉku aṇintāṉukku
   pai araviṉ aṇaip paḷḷiyiṉāṉukku
   kaiyoṭu kāl ceyya kaṇṇa pirāṉukku eṉ
   taiyal iḻantatu taṉṉuṭaic cāyē (7)
   3403. His many arms are like the branches of the Karpaga garden.
   He wears a beautiful crown like a shining hill.
   He has lovely lotus-like hands.
   It is true that my lovely daughter
   who has bow-shaped eyebrows has lost her beauty.
   3405 cāyak kuruntam ocitta tamiyaṟku
   māyac cakaṭam utaitta maṇāḷaṟku
   pēyaip piṇampaṭap pāl uṇ pirāṉukku eṉ
   vācak kuḻali iḻantatu māṇpē (8)
   3405. The matchless god broke the kurundam tree.
   He kicked Sakaṭasuran and killed him.
   He drank the milk from the breast of the devil Putana and killed her.
   My daughter with fragrant hair has lost her pride
   because she loves him.
   3406 māṇpu amai kōlattu em māyak kuṟaḷaṟku
   cēṇ cuṭark kuṉṟu aṉṉa ceñcuṭar mūrttikku
   kāṇ perum tōṟṟattu em kākutta nampikku eṉ
   pūṇ puṉai meṉmulai tōṟṟatu poṟpē (9)
   3406. He took the form of a lovely magic dwarf
   and cheated king Mahabali.
   His shines like a lustrous hill.
   He is the handsome Nambi of the Kahusta dynasty.
   My daughter’s soft breasts
   adorned with lovely ornaments have lost their beauty
   because she loves him.
   3407 poṟpu amai nīḷ muṭip pūn taṇ tuḻāyaṟku
   mal poru tōḷ uṭai māyap pirāṉukku
   niṟpaṉa pal uruvāy niṟkum māyaṟku eṉ
   kaṟpu uṭaiyāṭṭi iḻantatu kaṭṭē (10)
   3406. He took the form of a lovely magic dwarf
   and cheated king Mahabali.
   His shines like a lustrous hill.
   He is the handsome Nambi of the Kahusta dynasty.
   My daughter’s soft breasts
   adorned with lovely ornaments have lost their beauty
   because she loves him.
   3408 kaṭṭu eḻil cōlai nal vēṅkaṭavāṇaṉaik
   kaṭṭu eḻil teṉ kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ col
   kaṭṭu eḻil āyirattu ip pattum vallavar
   kaṭṭu eḻil vāṉavar pōkam uṇpārē (11)
   3408. Saḍagopan of southern Thirukuruhur
   composed a thousand beautiful pasurams
   on the god of Venkaṭam hill
   surrounded by thick beautiful groves.
   If devotees learn and recite these ten pasurams well
   they will go to heaven and enjoy being with gods.
   --------------
   tiruvāymoḻi - āṟām pattu (ēḻām tirumoḻi, 3409-3419)
   talaivaṉatu nakarnōkkic ceṉṟa makaḷaik kuṟittut tāy iraṅkutal
   (tirukkōḷūr)
   3409 uṇṇum cōṟu parukum nīr tiṉṉum veṟṟilaiyum ellām
   kaṇṇaṉ em perumāṉ eṉṟu eṉṟē kaṇkaḷ nīr malki
   maṇṇiṉuḷ avaṉ cīr vaḷam mikkavaṉ ūr viṉavi
   tiṇṇam eṉ iḷamāṉ pukum ūr tirukkōḷūrē (1)
   3409. Her mother says,
   "My daughter, gentle as a young deer,
   says, ‘The food we eat, the water we drink
   and the betelnut we chew all belong to Kaṇṇan.’
   Her eyes are filled with tears.
   She asks where the famous god stays
   and will surely go to Thirukkoḷur."
   3410 ūrum nāṭum ulakamum taṉṉaippōl avaṉuṭaiya
   pērum tārkaḷumē pitaṟṟa kaṟpu vāṉ iṭaṟi
   cērum nal vaḷam cēr paḻaṉat tirukkōḷūrkkē
   pōrum kol uraiyīr koṭiyēṉ koṭi pūvaikaḷē? (2)
   3409. Her mother says,
   "My daughter, gentle as a young deer,
   says, ‘The food we eat, the water we drink
   and the betelnut we chew all belong to Kaṇṇan.’
   Her eyes are filled with tears.
   She asks where the famous god stays
   and will surely go to Thirukkoḷur."
   3411 pūvai paiṅkiḷikaḷ pantu tūtai pūm puṭṭilkaḷ
   yāvaiyum tirumāl tirunāmaṅkaḷē kūvi eḻum eṉ
   pāvai pōy iṉit taṇ paḻaṉat tirukkōḷūrkkē
   kōvai vāy tuṭippa maḻaikkaṇṇoṭu eṉ ceyyumkolō? (3)
   3411.Her mother says,
   "My daughter’s puvai birds,
   green parrots, balls, wood dolls and flower baskets
   all call loudly the divine names of Thirumaal with her.
   Will my doll-like daughter reach Thirukoḷur surrounded by cool fields?
   What can she do if her lips that are like kovai fruits throb
   and her eyes shed tears like rain?"
   3412 kollai eṉparkolō kuṇam mikkaṉaḷ eṉparkolō
   cillai vāyp peṇṭukaḷ ayal cēri uḷḷārum? ellē
   celvam malki avaṉkiṭanta tirukkōḷūrkkē
   mēl iṭai nuṭaṅka iḷamāṉ cella mēviṉaḷē (4)
   3411.Her mother says,
   "My daughter’s puvai birds,
   green parrots, balls, wood dolls and flower baskets
   all call loudly the divine names of Thirumaal with her.
   Will my doll-like daughter reach Thirukoḷur surrounded by cool fields?
   What can she do if her lips that are like kovai fruits throb
   and her eyes shed tears like rain?"
   3413 mēvi naintu naintu viḷaiyāṭaluṟāḷ eṉ ciṟut
   tēvi pōy iṉit taṉ tirumāl tirukkōḷūril
   pū iyal poḻilum taṭamum avaṉ kōyilum kaṇṭu
   āvi uḷ kuḷira eṅṅaṉē ukakkumkol iṉṟē? (5)
   3413. Her mother says,
   "My little daughter, as beautiful as a goddess,
   does not want to play with her toys
   and only worries and worries.
   Today when she reaches Thirukoḷur of Thirumaal
   will her heart be happy to see
   the blooming groves, ponds and the temple of the lord?"
   3414 iṉṟu eṉakku utavātu akaṉṟa iḷamāṉ iṉip pōy
   teṉ ticait tilatam aṉaiya tirukkōḷūrkkē
   ceṉṟu taṉ tirumāl tirukkaṇṇum cevvāyum kaṇṭu
   niṉṟu niṉṟu naiyum neṭum kaṇkaḷ paṉi malkavē (6)
   3414. Her mother says,
   "My daughter, soft as a young deer
   does not want to help me in the house
   and has gone to southern Thirukoḷur,
   a place as important as a thilakam is for a face.
   Will she stand and stand looking at the divine eyes
   and the red mouth of the god
   as her long eyes fill with tears and she worries?"
   3415 malku nīrk kaṇṇoṭu maiyal uṟṟa maṉattiṉaḷāy
   allum naṉ pakalum neṭumāl eṉṟu aḻaittu iṉip pōy
   celvam malki avaṉ kiṭanta tirukkōḷurkkē
   olki olki naṭantu eṅṅaṉē pukumkol ocintē? (7)
   3415. Her mother says,
   "My daughter says night and day ‘Neḍumaal!’
   as her eyes fill with tears
   and her heart fills with love for him.
   She has walked to rich Thirukoḷur
   where the lord sleeps on the ocean.
   How could she go there walking slowly
   and be able to enter his temple?"
   3416 ocinta nuṇ iṭaimēl kaiyai vaittu nontu nontu
   kacinta neñciṉaḷāy kaṇṇa nīr tuḷumpac cellumkol
   ocinta oṇ malarāḷ koḻunaṉ tirukkōḷūrkkē
   kacinta neñciṉaḷāy emmai nītta em kārikaiyē? (8)
   3416. Her mother says,
   "Will my daughter holding her thin waist with her hands
   worry and fret as she walks,
   her eyes filling with tears and her heart melting,
   to Thirukoḷur where Lakshmi on a lovely lotus
   stays happily with her husband?
   Her heart sad, my young daughter has left me."
   3417 kāriyam nallaṉakaḷ avai kāṇil eṉ kaṇṇaṉukku eṉṟu
   īriyāy iruppāḷ itu ellām kiṭakka iṉip pōy
   cēri pal paḻi tūuy iraippa tirukkōḷūrkkē
   nēriḻai naṭantāḷ emmai oṉṟum niṉaintilaḷē (9)
   3417. Her mother says,
   "When my daughter sees good things,
   she says, ‘This is for my Kaṇṇan!’
   and she thinks of her love for him.
   Lovely with her beautiful ornaments,
   she walks to Thirukoḷur and doesn’t think of me.
   The village is filled with gossip about her."
   3418 niṉaikkilēṉ teyvaṅkāḷ neṭum kaṇ iḷamāṉ iṉip pōy
   aṉaittu ulakum uṭaiya aravintalōcaṉaṉait
   tiṉaittaṉaiyum viṭāḷ avaṉ cēr tirukkōḷūrkkē
   maṉaikku vāṉ paḻiyum niṉaiyāḷ cella vaittaṉaḷē (10)
   3418. Her mother says,
   "O gods, I cannot think of all the things she is doing.
   My young deer-like daughter has long eyes
   and she doesn’t stop even for a moment
   thinking of the lotus-eyed god, the ruler of the whole world.
   She has gone to Thirukoḷur where he stays
   and she doesn’t worry at all about the disgrace
   that will come to our family."
   3419 vaitta mā nitiyām matucūtaṉaiyē alaṟṟi
   kottu alar poḻil cūḻ kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ coṉṉa
   pattu nūṟṟuḷ ip pattu avaṉ cēr tirukkōḷūrkkē
   cittam vaittu uraippār tikaḻ poṉ ulaku āḷvārē (11)
   3419. Saḍagopan of Thirukuruhur
   surrounded by groves blooming with bunches of flowers
   composed a thousand pasurams on the god Madhusudhanan,
   the wonderful treasure saved and kept by all.
   If devotees learn, keep in their minds
   and recite these ten pasurams on Thirukoḷur
   where the god stays
   they will reach the golden world of moksha and rule there.
   -------------
   tiruvāymoḻi - āṟām pattu (eṭṭām tirumoḻi, 3420-3430)
   tirunāṭu mutaliyavaṟṟil talaimakaḷ paṟavaikaḷait tūtuviṭal
   3420 poṉ ulaku āḷīrō puvaṉi muḻutu āḷīrō
   nal nalap puḷḷiṉaṅkāḷ viṉaiyāṭṭiyēṉ nāṉ irantēṉ
   muṉ ulakaṅkaḷ ellām paṭaitta mukilvaṇṇaṉ kaṇṇaṉ
   eṉ nalam koṇṭa pirāṉ taṉakku eṉ nilaimai uraittē. (1)
   3420. Her daughter says,
   "O birds, you do good for others,
   would you do me a favor?
   I have done bad karma.
   I ask one thing of you.
   He created all the worlds.
   The dark cloud-colored Kaṇṇan
   has taken my happiness away.
   Go and tell him how I suffer.
   If you help me
   you will reach moksha and rule the golden world there,
   and you will rule this whole world also."
   3421 mai amar vāḷ neṭum kaṇ maṅkaimār muṉpu eṉ kai iruntu
   ney amar iṉ aṭicil niccal pāloṭu mēvīrō
   kai amar cakkarattu eṉ kaṉivāyp perumāṉaik kaṇṭu
   mey amar kātal colli kiḷikāḷ viraintu ōṭivantē (2)
   3421. Her daughter says,
   "O parrots, fly quickly and go to see the highest lord.
   His mouth is sweet as a fruit
   and he carries a discus in his hand.
   Go and tell him that my love is true.
   If you do that I will keep you among my young friends
   whose sharp long eyes are decorated with kohl
   and feed you sweet rice mixed with ghee."
   3422 ōṭivantu eṉ kuḻalmēl oḷi mā malar ūtīrō
   kūṭiya vaṇṭiṉaṅkāḷ kurunāṭu uṭai aivarkaṭku āy
   āṭiya mā neṭum tērppaṭai nīṟu eḻac ceṟṟa pirāṉ
   cūṭiya taṇ tuḷavam uṇṭa tū matu vāykaḷ koṇṭē (3)
   3422. Her daughter says,
   "O bees, you fly together in a swarm!
   The god stood on a great tall chariot on the battlefield
   and destroyed his enemies for the five Pandavas,
   the rulers of Kuruksetra.
   Won’t you taste the shining beautiful flowers in my hair
   after tasting the cool thulasi garland that the god wears
   and drinking the honey from it?"
   3423 tū matu vāykaḷ koṇṭuvantu eṉ mullaikaḷmēl tumpikāḷ
   pū matu uṇṇac cellil viṉaiyēṉaip poyceytu akaṉṟa
   mā matu vār taṇ tuḻāy muṭi vāṉavar kōṉaik kaṇṭu
   yām ituvō takkavāṟu eṉṉavēṇṭum kaṇṭīr nuṅkaṭkē? (4)
   3423. Her daughter says,
   "O thumbi flies! You stay on my mullai flowers
   and drink honey from them.
   If you go to drink the honey on flowers,
   see the king of the gods, adorned with a cool thulasi garland
   that drips with sweet honey.
   Surely, I have done bad karma.
   He lied to me and left me.
   Ask him, ‘Is what you do fair?
   She loves you.
   What do you want from her to love her back?’"
   3424 nuṅkaṭku yāṉ uraikkēṉ vammiṉ yāṉ vaḷartta kiḷikāḷ
   vem kaṇ puḷ ūrntu vantu viṉaiyēṉai neñcam kavarnta
   ceṅkaṇ karumukilai ceyya vāyc ceḻuṅ kaṟpakattai
   eṅkuc ceṉṟākilum kaṇṭu ituvō takkavāṟu? eṉmiṉē (5)
   3424. Her daughter says,
   "O parrots, I raised you.
   I want to say something to you. Come to me.
   I have done bad karma.
   The god that rides on cruel-eyed Garuḍa
   saw me and attracted my heart.
   If you see the lord who is generous as a karpaga tree,
   with beautiful eyes, a color dark as a cloud and a red mouth,
   ask him, ‘Is what you do fair?’"
   3425 eṉ miṉṉu nūl mārvaṉ eṉ karum perumāṉ eṉ kaṇṇaṉ
   taṉ maṉṉu nīḷ kaḻalmēl taṇ tuḻāy namakku aṉṟi nalkāṉ
   kalmiṉkaḷ eṉṟu ummai yāṉ kaṟpiyāvaitta māṟṟamcolli
   celmiṉkaḷ tīviṉaiyēṉ vaḷartta ciṟu pūvaikaḷē (6)
   3425. Her daughter says,
   "O small puvai birds, I raised you.
   I have done bad karma.
   The highest dark-colored Kaṇṇan,
   wears a shining sacred thread on his chest.
   He will not give his cool thulasi garland
   that adorns his long body to anyone but me.
   Wherever you fly say the words that I have taught you.
   When you see him ask him, ‘Is what you do fair?’"
   3426 pūvaikaḷ pōl niṟattaṉ puṇṭarīkaṅkaḷ pōlum kaṇṇaṉ
   yāvaiyum yāvarum āy niṉṟa māyaṉ eṉ āḻip pirāṉ
   māvai val vāy piḷanta matucūtaṟku eṉ māṟṟam colli
   pāvaikaḷ tīrkkiṟṟirē viṉaiyāṭṭiyēṉ pācaṟavē? (7)
   3425. Her daughter says,
   "O small puvai birds, I raised you.
   I have done bad karma.
   The highest dark-colored Kaṇṇan,
   wears a shining sacred thread on his chest.
   He will not give his cool thulasi garland
   that adorns his long body to anyone but me.
   Wherever you fly say the words that I have taught you.
   When you see him ask him, ‘Is what you do fair?’"
   3427 pācaṟavu eyti iṉṉē viṉaiyēṉ eṉai ūḻi naivēṉ
   ācu aṟu tūvi veḷḷaik kurukē aruḷceytu orunāḷ
   mācu aṟu nīlac cuṭar muṭi vāṉavar kōṉaik kaṇṭu
   ēcu aṟum nummai allāl maṟunōkku ilaḷ pērttu maṟṟē (8)
   3427. Her daughter says,
   "O white kurugu bird with faultless white feathers,
   have pity on me.
   I no longer have any love for my relatives.
   How many eons can I suffer?
   Go and see the king of gods adorned with a shining crown
   and a faultless dark color and tell him,
   ‘She doesn’t want to think of anyone but you, the faultless one.
   She is waiting for you to give her your grace.’"
   3428 pērttu maṟṟu ōr kaḷaikaṇ viṉaiyāṭṭiyēṉ nāṉ oṉṟu ilēṉ
   nīrt tiraimēl ulavi irai tērum putā iṉaṅkāḷ
   kārt tiraḷ mā mukil pōl kaṇṇaṉ viṇṇavar kōṉaik kaṇṭu
   vārttaikaḷ koṇṭu aruḷi uraiyīr vaikal vantiruntē (9)
   3428. Her daughter says,
   "I have done bad karma. I have no refuge but him.
   O flock of cranes!
   You search for food wandering near the rippling water.
   Go and see the beautiful thick cloud-colored Kaṇṇan,
   the king of the gods in the sky
   and tell him of my love sickness.
   Then come back at dawn and tell me what he told you."
   3429 vantiruntu ummuṭaiya maṇic cēvalum nīrum ellām
   antaram oṉṟum iṉṟi alarmēl acaiyum aṉṉaṅkāḷ
   eṉ tiru mārvaṟku eṉṉai iṉṉavāṟu ivaḷ kāṇmiṉ eṉṟu
   mantirattu oṉṟu uṇartti uraiyīr maṟumāṟṟaṅkaḷē (10)
   3429. Her daughter says,
   "O swans, you stay happily on flowers with your beloved beautiful
   mates,
   so close to them there is no space between you.
   Go to my lord on whose chest lovely Lakshmi stays
   and tell him, ‘Look at her condition. She suffers for the love of you.’
   Repeat that as if it were a manthra so he will understand it.
   Then come back in the morning and tell me his answer."
   3430 māṟṟaṅkaḷ āyntukoṇṭu matucūta pirāṉ aṭimēl
   nāṟṟaṅkoḷ pūm poḻil cūḻ kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ coṉṉa
   tōṟṟaṅkaḷ āyirattuḷ ivaiyum orupattum vallār
   ūṟṟiṉkaṇ nuṇ maṇal pōl urukāniṟpar nīrāyē (11)
   3430. Sadagopan of Thirukuruhur
   surrounded by fragrant blooming groves
   composed a thousand pasurams describing how the girls
   who fall in love with Madhusudanan
   send their birds to him as messengers.
   If devotees learn these ten pasurams and recite them
   their hearts will melt for the god
   like soft sand in a spring.
   -------------
   tiruvāymoḻi - āṟām pattu (oṉpatām tirumoḻi, 3431-3441)
   kēṭṭōr neñcam nīrāy urukumvaṇṇam āḻvār emperumāṉaik kūppiṭutal
   3431 nīr āy nilaṉ āy tī āy kāl āy neṭu vāṉ āy
   cīr ār cuṭarkaḷ iraṇṭu āy civaṉ āy ayaṉ āṉāy
   kūr ār āḻi veṇ caṅku ēnti koṭiyēṉpāl
   vārāy orunāḷ maṇṇum viṇṇum makiḻavē (1)
   3431. O lord, you are the ocean, earth, fire, wind and the wide sky,
   the bright sun and the moon, Shiva and Brahma.
   I have done bad karma.
   One day please come to me carrying your sharp discus
   and your white conch as the earth and sky exult in joy.
   3432 maṇṇum viṇṇum makiḻa kuṟaḷ āy valam kāṭṭi
   maṇṇum viṇṇum koṇṭa māya ammāṉē
   naṇṇi uṉai nāṉ kaṇṭu ukantu kūttāṭa
   naṇṇi orunāḷ ñālattūṭē naṭavāyē (2)
   3432. You, a magical one, are my mother.
   You took the form of a dwarf
   and took the earth and sky at Mahabali’s sacrifice.
   Come to this earth one day
   and I will approach you, see you and dance happily.
   3433 ñālattūṭē naṭantum niṉṟum kiṭantu iruntum
   cālap pala nāḷ ukamtōṟu uyirkaḷ kāppāṉē
   kōlat tiru mā makaḷōṭu uṉṉaik kūṭātē
   cālap pala nāḷ aṭiyēṉ iṉṉum taḷarvēṉō? (3)
   3433. You come to this earth.
   walk, stand and sleep and protect the creatures of the world,
   staying here happily.
   I want to see you with the beautiful divine Lakshmi.
   I, your devotee, have grown tired waiting so long to see you.
   3434 taḷarntum muṟintum cakaṭa acurar uṭal vēṟāp
   piḷantu vīya tirukkāl āṇṭa perumāṉē
   kiḷarntu piramaṉ civaṉ intiraṉ viṇṇavar cūḻa
   viḷaṅka orunāḷ kāṇa vārāy viṇmītē (4)
   3434. You are the highest god.
   Sakatasuran came as a cart
   and with your legs you kicked and killed him,
   breaking the cart into pieces
   so the whole world would know your power.
   Show yourself in the sky one day,
   surrounded by Brahma, Shiva, Indra and all the gods,
   so the whole world can see you.
   3435 viṇmītu iruppāy malaimēl niṟpāy kaṭal cērppāy
   maṇmītu uḻalvāy ivaṟṟuḷ eṅkum maṟaintu uṟaivāy
   eṇmītu iyaṉṟa puṟa aṇṭattāy eṉatu āvi
   yuḷ mītu āṭi uruk kāṭṭātē oḷippāyō? (5)
   3435. You stay in the sky.
   You stay in a standing form on Thiruvenkaṭam hills.
   You sleep on the milky ocean.
   You came to the earth in many forms.
   You abide, hiding yourself.
   You are above our thoughts and stay above the earth.
   You are in my soul and you stay there
   but you do not show your form to my eyes.
   3436 pāy ōr aṭi vaittu ataṉ kīḻp paravai nilam ellām
   tāy ōr aṭiyāl ellā ulakum taṭavanta
   māyōṉ uṉṉaik kāṇpāṉ varunti eṉaināḷum
   tīyōṭu uṭaṉcēr meḻukāy ulakil tirivēṉō? (6)
   3436. You put one foot on this earth
   and took over all the land.
   You are Maayon who took the whole earth at Mahabali’s sacrifice.
   I melt like wax in fire,
   suffering to see you and wandering in the world.
   3437 ulakil tiriyum karuma kati āy ulakam āy
   ulakukkē ōr uyirum āṉāy puṟa aṇṭattu
   alakil polinta ticai pattu āya aruvēyō
   alakil polinta aṟivilēṉukku aruḷāyē (7)
   3437. You are all the actions of the world.
   You are the refuge for all creatures of the world.
   You are the world.
   You are the soul on this earth.
   You have no form
   but you shine in all the ten directions.
   I am ignorant. Give me your grace, O shining lord.
   3438 aṟivilēṉukku aruḷāy aṟivār uyir āṉāy
   veṟi koḷ cōti mūrtti aṭiyēṉ neṭumālē
   kiṟiceytu eṉṉaip puṟattiṭṭu iṉṉam keṭuppāyō
   piṟitu oṉṟu aṟiyā aṭiyēṉ āvi tikaikkavē? (8)
   3438. I am ignorant. Give me your grace.
   You are my wise soul and you shine.
   O Neḍumaal, I am your slave.
   Are you playing with me, cheating me and spoiling me?
   I am your slave.
   You shock my heart with your games
   but I know nothing else but loving you.
   3439 āvi tikaikka aivar kumaikkum ciṟṟiṉpam
   pāviyēṉaip pala nī kāṭṭip paṭuppāyō?
   tāvi vaiyam koṇṭa taṭam tāmarai kaṭkē
   kūvik koḷḷum kālam iṉṉam kuṟukātō? (9)
   3439. All my five senses hurt and shock my soul.
   I am a sinner.
   Why do you play with me so much and make me suffer?
   You have measured the world
   with your beautiful lotus feet that grew into the sky.
   Won’t the time come soon when I can call you and join you?
   3440 kuṟukā nīḷā iṟutikūṭā eṉai ūḻi
   ciṟukā perukā aḷavu il iṉpam cērntālum
   maṟu kāl iṉṟi māyōṉ uṉakkē āḷākum
   ciṟu kālattai uṟumō antō teriyilē? (10)
   3440. Pleasures in the world may shrink or grow,
   they may go away.
   The world may end and again arise.
   O Maayon, even if I join you for a little time
   that is much better than all the happiness I get in this world.
   I do not know when that time will come.
   3441 terital niṉaital eṇṇal ākāt tirumālukku
   uriya toṇṭar toṇṭar toṇṭaṉ caṭakōpaṉ
   teriyac coṉṉa ōr āyirattuḷ ip pattum
   uriya toṇṭar ākkum ulakam uṇṭāṟkē (11)
   3441. Saḍagopan, the devotee of the devotees
   of the devotees of dear Thirumaal
   who know and think only of the god
   composed a thousand good poems.
   If devotees learn and recite these ten poems
   they will become the devotees of the god of the world.
   -------------
   tiruvāymoḻi - āṟām pattu (pattām tirumoḻi, 3442-3452)
   tiruvēṅkaṭamuṭaiyāṉatu tiruvaṭikaḷil caraṇampukutal (tiruvēṅkaṭam)
   3442 ulakam uṇṭa peruvāyā
   ulappu il kīrtti ammāṉē
   nilavum cuṭar cūḻ oḷi mūrtti
   neṭiyāy aṭiyēṉ ār uyirē
   tilatam ulakukku āy niṉṟa
   tiruvēṅkaṭattu em perumāṉē
   kula tol aṭiyēṉ uṉa pātam
   kūṭum āṟu kūṟāyē (1)
   3442. O god,
   you swallowed all the worlds with your huge mouth.
   O father, you have limitless fame.
   You shine surrounded by the sun and moon.
   You are the tall god.
   You are dear life for me, your slave.
   You are the great god of Thiruvenkaṭam hill
   and you are like a thilakam for the world.
   I am your devotee born in an ancient family.
   Tell me how to reach your feet.
   3443 kūṟu āy nīṟu āy nilaṉ āki
   koṭu val acurar kulam ellām
   cīṟā eriyum tiru nēmi
   valavā teyvak kōmāṉē
   cēṟu ār cuṉait tāmarai centī
   malarum tiruvēṅkaṭattāṉē
   āṟā aṉpil aṭiyēṉ uṉ
   aṭicēr vaṇṇam aruḷāyē (2)
   3443. You are the form of the five elements
   fire, land, water. fire and wind.
   You carry a divine discus
   and you killed all the strong cruel Rakshasa tribes
   and burned their lands.
   You are the lord of Thiruvenkaṭam
   where lotuses red as fire bloom from the mud in springs.
   I love you without any limit.
   Give me your grace and bring me to your feet.
   3444 vaṇṇam maruḷ koḷ aṇi mēka
   vaṇṇā māya ammāṉē
   eṇṇam pukuntu tittikkum
   amutē imaiyōr atipatiyē
   teḷ nal aruvi maṇi poṉ muttu
   alaikkum tiruvēṅkaṭattāṉē
   aṇṇalē uṉ aṭi cēra
   aṭiyēṟku āā eṉṉāyē (3)
   3444. O my father,
   you, beautiful cloud-colored Maayan, enchant everyone.
   You are sweet nectar and you enter my thoughts.
   You are the lord of the gods whose eyes do not blink.
   You are the god of Thiruvenkaṭam
   where a clear waterfalls descends beautifully
   scattering diamonds, gold and pearls.
   You are the highest.
   Give me your grace and bring me to your feet.
   3445 āā eṉṉātu ulakattai
   alaikkum acurar vāḻ nāḷmēl
   tī vāy vāḷi maḻai poḻinta
   cilaiyā tiru mā makaḷ kēḷvā
   tēvā curarkaḷ muṉikkaṇaṅkaḷ
   virumpum tiruvēṅkaṭattāṉē
   pū ār kaḻalkaḷ aruviṉaiyēṉ
   poruntumāṟu puṇarāyē (4)
   3445. The Asurans troubled people
   without feeling sorry for them
   and you shot your fiery arrows like rain and killed them.
   O divine god, you are the beloved of Lakshmi.
   You are the lord of Thiruvenkaṭam
   where sages and the gods in the sky love to worship you.
   I have done bad karma.
   Give me your grace and bring me to your lotus feet
   ornamented with anklets.
   3446 puṇarā niṉṟa maram ēḻ aṉṟu
   eyta oru vil valavā ō
   puṇar ēy niṉṟa maram iraṇṭiṉ
   naṭuvē pōṉa mutalvā ō
   tiṇar ār mēkam eṉak kaḷiṟu
   cērum tiruvēṅkaṭattāṉē
   tiṇar ār cārṅkattu uṉa pātam
   cērvatu aṭiyēṉ ennāḷē? (5)
   3446. You are the mighty one who, shooting one arrow,
   destroyed the seven trees that were joined together.
   You, the ancient one, went between the Asurans
   who came as two trees.
   You stay in Thiruvenkaṭam where a herd of strong elephants
   looks like a group of clouds.
   You carry the mighty bow Charngam.
   When will I, your devotee, truly join your feet?
   3447 ennāḷē nām maṇ aḷanta
   iṇait tāmaraikaḷ kāṇpataṟku eṉṟu
   ennāḷum niṉṟu imaiyōrkaḷ
   ētti iṟaiñci iṉam iṉamāy
   meyn nā maṉattāl vaḻipāṭu
   ceyyum tiruvēṅkaṭattāṉē
   meyn nāṉ eyti en nāḷ uṉ
   aṭikkaṇ aṭiyēṉ mēvuvatē? (6)
   3447. You are the god of Thiruvenkaṭam
   where the gods in the sky come, praise and worship
   with their bodies, tongues and minds, saying,
   "When will the day come when we see
   the lotus feet that measured the world?"
   When will the true day come
   when I, your devotee, come and join your feet?
   3448 aṭiyēṉ mēvi amarkiṉṟa
   amutē imaiyōr atipatiyē
   koṭiyā aṭu puḷ uṭaiyāṉē
   kōlak kaṉivāyp perumāṉē
   ceṭi ār viṉaikaḷ tīr maruntē
   tiruvēṅkaṭattu em perumāṉē
   noṭi ār poḻutum uṉa pātam
   kāṇa nōlātu āṟṟēṉē (7)
   3448. You are my nectar.
   and I, your devotee, enjoy worshipping you.
   You are the lord of the gods and you carry an eagle flag.
   O highest one, your beautiful mouth is as sweet as a fruit.
   You are the remedy for cruel karma.
   You are the god of Thiruvenkaṭam.
   I suffer wanting to see your feet every moment
   and I cannot bear it.
   3449 nōlātu āṟṟēṉ uṉa pātam
   kāṇa eṉṟu nuṇ uṇarviṉ
   nīl ār kaṇṭattu ammāṉum
   niṟai nāṉmukaṉum intiraṉum
   cēl ēy kaṇṇār palar cūḻa
   virumpum tiruvēṅkaṭattāṉē
   mālāy mayakki aṭiyēṉpāl
   vantāy pōlē vārāyē (8)
   3449. Shiva who has a dark neck,
   faultless Nanmuhan, Indra
   and beautiful fish-eyed women
   join together in Thiruvenkaṭam
   and worship you, saying "We cannot wait to see your feet!"
   You came to the earth as Maal and fascinated everyone.
   Won’t you come to us
   just as you have always come to the world?
   3450 vantāy pōlē vārātāy
   vārātāy pōl varuvāṉē
   centāmaraik kaṇ ceṅkaṉi vāy
   nāl tōḷ amutē eṉatu uyirē
   cintāmaṇikaḷ pakar allaip
   pakal cey tiruvēṅkaṭattāṉē
   antō aṭiyēṉ uṉa pātam
   akalakillēṉ iṟaiyumē (9)
   3450. It seems as if you are coming,
   but you do not come to me.
   It seems you are not coming, but you do come to me.
   You have lovely lotus eyes
   and a red mouth like sweet fruit or nectar.
   You are my life.
   You are the god of Thiruvenkaṭam
   where chintamaṇi jewels turn night into day.
   Alas, I am your slave.
   I cannot be away from your feet even for a moment.
   3451 akalakillēṉ iṟaiyum eṉṟu
   alarmēl maṅkai uṟai mārpā
   nikar il pukaḻāy ulakam mūṉṟu
   uṭaiyāy eṉṉai āḷvāṉē
   nikar il amarar muṉikkaṇaṅkaḷ
   virumpum tiruvēṅkaṭattāṉē
   pukal oṉṟu illā aṭiyēṉ uṉ
   aṭikkīḻ amarntu pukuntēṉē. (10)
   3451. Lakshmi on a lotus says,
   "I will not go away from you even for a moment"
   and stays on your chest.
   Nothing compares to your fame.
   You rule all three worlds and you are my king.
   You are the lord of Thiruvenkaṭam
   whom the matchless gods and sages love.
   I have no other refuge.
   I am your slave and I have come to you to sit beneath your feet.
   3452 aṭikkīḻ amarntu pukuntu aṭiyīr
   vāḻmiṉ eṉṟu eṉṟu aruḷkoṭukkum
   paṭik kēḻ illāp perumāṉaip
   paḻaṉak kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ
   muṭippāṉ coṉṉa āyirattut
   tiruvēṅkaṭattukku ivai pattum
   piṭittār piṭittār vīṟṟiruntu
   periya vāṉuḷ nilāvuvarē. (11)
   3452. Sadagopan of Thirukuruhur flourishing with paddy fields
   composed a thousand pasurams on the matchless lord
   of Thiruvenkaṭam who gives his grace, saying,
   "Come and sit beneath my feet and you will be saved."
   If devotees learn and recite these ten pasurams
   they will become the devotees of his devotees
   and reach and abide in moksha in the wide sky.
   -------------
                     ___________________________________

          nammāḻvār tiruvāymoḻi eḻām pattu (3453 - 3562)
         Divyaprabhandam - Thiruvaymozhi - Eezhaam Pathu 3453 - 3562

   tiruvāymoḻi eḻām pattu (mutal tirumoḻi, 3453-3463)
   intiriyaṅkaḷāl iṉṉum ettaṉai nāḷ tuṉpuṟuvēṉ eṉṟu āḻvār varuntal
   3453 uḷ nilāviya aivarāl kumaitīṟṟi eṉṉai
   uṉ pātapaṅkayam
   naṇṇilāvakaiyē nalivāṉ iṉṉum eṇṇukiṉṟāy
   eṇ ilāp peṟu māyaṉē imaiyōrkaḷ
   ēttum ulakam mūṉṟu uṭai
   aṇṇalē amutē appaṉē eṉṉai āḷvāṉē (1)
   3453. You are still intent on giving my body
   the feelings of the five senses even though they hurt me
   and do not let me reach your lotus feet.
   You are the great Maayan—no one knows who you are.
   You are the ruler, praised by the gods, of the three worlds.
   You are nectar, my father, and you rule me.
   3454 eṉṉai āḷum vaṉ kō ōr aintu ivai peytu
   irāppakal mōtuvittiṭṭu
   uṉṉai nāṉ aṇukāvakai ceytu pōtikaṇṭāy
   kaṉṉalē amutē kār mukil vaṇṇaṉē
   kaṭal ñālam kākkiṉṟa
   miṉṉu nēmiyiṉāy viṉaiyēṉuṭai vētiyaṉē (2)
   3454. You make the perceptions of my five bodily senses rule,
   hurting me night and day and attacking my goodness
   so I am unable to come to you.
   You are as sweet as sugarcane juice and divine nectar.
   You have the color of a dark cloud.
   You carry a shining discus that protects the world
   surrounded by oceans.
   You are the lord of the Vedas and you gave me my karma.
   3455 vētiyāniṟkum aivarāl viṉaiyēṉai
   mōtuvittu uṉ tiruvaṭic
   cātiyāvakai nī taṭuttu eṉ peṟuti? antō!
   āti āki akal iṭam paṭaittu uṇṭu
   umiḻntu kaṭantu iṭantiṭṭa
   cōti nīḷ muṭiyāy toṇṭaṉēṉ matucūtaṉaṉē (3)
   3455. What do you get
   by making the perceptions of the five senses hurt me
   and increasing my bad karma,
   preventing me from reaching your divine feet?
   Alas, you are the ancient god.
   You created this wide world, swallowed it and spit it out.
   You, the shining lord took the form of a boar,
   split open the ground and brought up earth goddess
   when an Asuran took and hid her.
   You are decorated with a shining crown.
   I am your devotee.
   You are Madhusudanan.
   3456 cūtu nāṉ aṟiyāvakai cuḻaṟṟi ōr aivaraik
   kāṭṭi uṉ aṭip
   pōtu nāṉ aṇukāvakai ceytu pōtikaṇṭāy
   yātum yāvarum iṉṟi niṉ akampāl oṭukki
   ōr āliṉ nīḷ ilai
   mītu cēr kuḻavi viṉaiyēṉ viṉaitīr maruntē (4)
   3456. See, you made the perceptions of the five senses hurt me
   and I could not reach your flower-like feet.
   You contain all things and creatures of the world
   in your stomach and sleep on a banyan leaf as a child.
   I have done bad karma.
   You are the remedy that can relieve me of my karma.
   3457 tīr maruntu iṉṟi aintu nōy aṭum cekkil iṭṭut
   tirikkum aivarai
   nēr maruṅku uṭaittā aṭaittu nekiḻppāṉ okkiṉṟāy
   ār maruntu iṉi ākuvār aṭal āḻi ēnti
   acurar vaṉ kulam
   vēr maruṅku aṟuttāy viṇṇuḷār perumāṉē? ō (5)
   3457. You make the five senses hurt me and I do not know
   any remedy to counter the pain they give me.
   Who can relieve me of that pain?
   You destroyed the terrible tribe of the Asurans with your heroic
   discus.
   You are the god of the gods in the sky.
   3458 viṇṇuḷār perumāṟku aṭimai ceyvāraiyum
   ceṟum aimpulaṉ ivai
   maṇṇuḷ eṉṉaip peṟṟāl eṉ ceyyā maṟṟu nīyum viṭṭāl?
   paṇṇuḷāy kavi taṉṉuḷāy pattiyiṉ uḷḷāy
   paramīcaṉē vantu eṉ
   kaṇṇuḷāy neñcuḷāy colluḷāy oṉṟu collāyē (6)
   3458. The five senses hurt even the devotees of the lord.
   I just live in this world—how could they not hurt me?
   You are in music, you are in poetry,
   you are the devotion of devotees.
   You, the highest god,
   come and stay in my heart and in my eyes.
   Speak to me and tell me something
   to get rid of the feelings that the five senses give me.
   3459 oṉṟu colli oruttiṉil niṟkilāta
   ōr aivar vaṉ kayavarai
   eṉṟu yāṉ velkiṟpaṉ uṉ tiruvaruḷ illaiyēl?
   aṉṟu tēvar acurar vāṅka alaikaṭal
   aravam aḷāvi ōr
   kuṉṟam vaitta entāy koṭiyēṉ paruku iṉ amutē (7)
   3459. Unless you give me your grace,
   how can I conquer the five senses,
   the thieves that make me unstable?
   O father, when the gods could not churn
   the milky ocean with its roaring waves
   you helped them and churned it with them
   using the snake Vasuki and Manthara mountain.
   I am cruel, and you are nectar that I can drink.
   3460 iṉ amutu eṉat tōṉṟi ōr aivar yāvaraiyum
   mayakka nī vaitta
   muṉṉam māyam ellām muḻu vēr arintu eṉṉai uṉ
   ciṉṉamum tiru mūrttiyum cintittu ēttik
   kaitoḻavē aruḷ eṉakku
   eṉ ammā eṉ kaṇṇā imaiyōr tam kulamutalē (8)
   3460. Before, you gave me the pleasures of the five senses
   and fascinated me with your magic.
   Now you come as sweet nectar and utterly remove
   all the joy of my senses.
   Give me your grace to worship your form
   and your discus, conch and club.
   You are the three gods, Shiva, Brahma and Indra.
   You are my mother, my dear one,
   and the source of the gods in the sky.
   3461 kulam mutal aṭum tīviṉaik koṭu vaṉ kuḻiyiṉil
   vīḻkkum aivarai
   valam mutal keṭukkum varamē tantaruḷkaṇṭāy
   nilam mutal iṉi ev ulakukkum niṟpaṉa
   celvaṉa eṉap poruḷ
   pala mutal paṭaittāy eṉ kaṇṇā eṉ parañcuṭarē (9)
   3461. The pleasures of the five senses that give bad karma
   will destroy everyone in someone’s family.
   You gave me a boon and destroyed those pleasures.
   You created all the worlds and the creatures
   that stay and move and all other things.
   You are my Kaṇṇan. You are the highest light.
   3462 eṉ parañcuṭarē eṉṟu uṉṉai alaṟṟi
   uṉ iṇait tāmaraikaṭku
   aṉpu uruki niṟkum atu niṟka cumaṭu tantāy
   vaṉ paraṅkaḷ eṭuttu aivar ticai ticai
   valittu eṟṟukiṉṟaṉar
   muṉ paravai kaṭaintu amutam koṇṭa mūrtti ō (10)
   3462. You gave me the burden
   of melting in love for you and worshiping your lotus feet,
   crying and saying, "You are the highest light!"
   The five senses stand everywhere and threaten me.
   O lord, you churned the milky ocean and took nectar from it.
   3463 koṇṭa mūrtti ōr mūvarāyk kuṇaṅkaḷ paṭaittu
   aḷittu keṭukkum ap
   puṇṭarīkak koppūḻp puṉal paḷḷi appaṉukkē
   toṇṭar toṇṭar toṇṭar toṇṭaṉ
   caṭakōpaṉ col āyirattuḷ ip pattum
   kaṇṭu pāṭa vallār viṉai pōm kaṅkulum pakalē (11)
   3463. Saḍagopan, a devotee of the devotees of the devotees
   of the devotees of the lord composed a thousand pasurams on the god.
   Brahma stays on the lotus on his navel.
   He, our father, has three forms, Shiva, Brahma and Indra.
   He creates the world, protects it and destroys it.
   If devotees learn and recite these ten pasurams
   they will have no results of karma, day or night.
   -----------
   tiruvāymoḻi eḻām pattu (iraṇṭām tirumoḻi, 3464-3475)
   tiruvaraṅkap perumāṉiṭam talaivi mikavum mōkittiruppataik
   kaṇṭa tāy araṅkaraip pārttu viṉāvutal (tiruvaraṅkam)
   3464 kaṅkulum pakalum kaṇ tuyil aṟiyāḷ
   kaṇṇa nīr kaikaḷāl iṟaikkum
   caṅku cakkaraṅkaḷ eṉṟu kai kūppum
   tāmaraik kaṇ eṉṟē taḷarum
   eṅṅaṉē tarikkēṉ uṉṉaiviṭṭu? eṉṉum
   iru nilam kai tuḻā irukkum
   ceṅkayal pāy nīrt tiruvaraṅkattāy
   ivaḷ tiṟattu eṉ ceykiṉṟāyē? (1)
   3464. Her mother worries and says,
   "My daughter doesn’t sleep night or day.
   With her fingers, she wipes away the tears that drip from her eyes.
   She folds her hands, worships and says, "Conch and discus!"
   Tired, she says, "He has lotus eyes!"
   She says, "How can I survive without you?"
   and with her hands, she searches all over for you.
   You are the god of Thiruvarangam
   abundant with water where lovely kayal fish frolic.
   What did you do to make her like this?"
   3465 eṉ ceykiṉṟāy eṉ tāmaraik kaṇṇā?
   eṉṉum kaṇṇīr malka irukkum
   eṉ ceykēṉ eṟi nīrt tiruvaraṅkattāy?
   eṉṉum vevvuyirttu uyirttu urukum
   muṉ ceyta viṉaiyē mukappaṭāy eṉṉum
   mukilvaṇṇā takuvatō? eṉṉum
   muṉ ceytu iv ulakam uṇṭu umiḻntu aḷantāy
   eṉkolō muṭikiṉṟatu ivaṭkē? (2)
   3465. Her mother worries and says,
   " My daughter says,
   ‘You are my lotus-eyed Kaṇṇan. Why do you do this to me?’
   Her eyes fill with tears and she says,
   ‘You are the lord of Thiruvarangam
   surrounded by the ocean roaring with waves.
   What will I do?’ and she sighs and melts.
   She says, ‘I have done much bad karma
   and that is why you don’t come before me.
   Is that right?’
   You swallowed the world and spit it out.
   What will happen to her?"
   3466 vaṭku ilaḷ iṟaiyum maṇivaṇṇā eṉṉum
   vāṉamē nōkkum maiyākkum
   uṭku uṭai acurar uyir ellām uṇṭa
   oruvaṉē eṉṉum uḷ urukum
   kaṭkilī uṉṉaik kāṇumāṟu aruḷāy
   kākuttā kaṇṇaṉē eṉṉum
   tiṇ koṭi matiḷ cūḻ tiruvaraṅkattāy
   ivaḷtiṟattu eṉ ceytiṭṭāyē? (3)
   3466. Her mother worries and says,
   "My daughter doesn’t feel ashamed at all.
   She says, ‘You have the color of blue sapphire.’
   She looks at the sky and, fascinated, and she says,
   ‘The Asurans gave fear to all people.
   You are unique and you destroyed them.’
   Her heart melts.
   She says, ‘No one can see you.
   Give me your grace so I may see you.
   You are Raman of the Kahusta dynasty.
   You are Kaṇṇan.’
   You stay in Thiruvarangam
   surrounded by walls where flags fly.
   What did you do to fascinate her?"
   3467 iṭṭa kāl iṭṭa kaiyaḷāy irukkum
   eḻuntu ulāy mayaṅkum kai kūppum
   kaṭṭamē kātal eṉṟu mūrccikkum
   kaṭalvaṇṇā kaṭiyaikāṇ eṉṉum
   vaṭṭa vāy nēmi valaṅkaiyā eṉṉum
   vantiṭāy eṉṟu eṉṟē mayaṅkum
   ciṭṭaṉē ceḻu nīrt tiruvaraṅkattāy
   ivaḷtiṟattu eṉ cintittāyē? (4)
   3467. Her mother worries and says,
   "My daughter stays in one place
   without moving her hands and legs.
   Sometime she gets up and walks around.
   She is fascinated with someone.
   She folds her hands and worships.
   She says, ‘Love is trouble’ and sighs.
   In her delusion, she says, ‘You have the color of the ocean.
   See, you are difficult.
   You carry a round discus in your left hand. Come to me.’
   You are a chithan. You stay in Thiruvarangam
   surrounded by flourishing water.
   What do you think you are doing to her?"
   3468 cintikkum ticaikkum tēṟum kai kūppum
   tiruvaraṅkattuḷḷāy eṉṉum
   vantikkum āṅkē maḻaikkaṇ nīr malka
   vantiṭāy eṉṟu eṉṟē mayaṅkum
   antippōtu avuṇaṉ uṭal iṭantāṉē
   alai kaṭal kaṭainta ār amutē
   cantittu uṉ caraṇam cārvatē valitta
   taiyalai maiyal ceytāṉē (5)
   3468. Her mother worries and says,
   "My daughter thinks deeply.
   She folds her hands and worships all the directions.
   She says, ‘You stay in Thiruvarangam,’
   Her eyes fill with tears and she worships you.
   She says, ‘Come to me’ and is fascinated with you.
   She says, ‘Once, in the evening,
   you split open the body of Hiranyan.
   You are the sweet nectar that was churned
   from the milky ocean rolling with waves.’
   She thinks only you are her refuge and lives for you.
   You have made her fall in love with you."
   3469 maiyal ceytu eṉṉai maṉam kavarntāṉē
   eṉṉum mā māyaṉē eṉṉum
   ceyya vāy maṇiyē eṉṉum taṇ puṉal cūḻ
   tiruvaraṅkattuḷḷāy eṉṉum
   veyya vāḷ taṇṭu caṅku cakkaram vil
   ēntum viṇṇōr mutal eṉṉum;
   pai koḷ pāmpu aṇaiyāy ivaḷtiṟattu aruḷāy
   pāviyēṉ ceyaṟpālatuvē (6)
   3469. Her mother worries and says,
   "My daughter says,
   ‘He fascinated me and attracted my mind.’
   She says, ‘You are a real Maayan.’
   She says, ‘You are a diamond and your red mouth is beautiful.’
   She says, ‘You stay in Thiruvarangam surrounded by cool water.’
   She says, ‘You are the ancient god of gods in the sky
   and you carry a strong sword, club, conch, discus and a bow.’
   O god, you sleep on Adisesha. Give her your grace.
   This is the only thing I ask you."
   3470 pāla tuṉpaṅkaḷ iṉpaṅkaḷ paṭaittāy
   paṟṟilār paṟṟa niṉṟāṉē
   kāla cakkarattāy kaṭal iṭam koṇṭa
   kaṭalvaṇṇā kaṇṇaṉē eṉṉum
   cēl koḷ taṇ puṉal cūḻ tiruvaraṅkattāy
   eṉṉum eṉ tīrttaṉē eṉṉum
   kōla mā maḻaikkaṇ paṉi malka irukkum
   eṉṉuṭaik kōmaḷak koḻuntē (7)
   3470. Her mother worries and says,
   "My daughter says,
   ‘You created sorrows and happiness.
   You are desire for those who have no desire.
   You carry the discus that destroys those who are evil.
   You have the color of the ocean and you sleep on the ocean.
   You are Kannan.’
   She says, ‘You stay in Thiruvarangam
   surrounded by water where fish frolic.’
   She says, ‘You are my sacred temple.’
   She is my lovely daughter, soft as a tender shoot
   and her beautiful eyes are filled with tears."
   3471 koḻuntu vāṉavarkaṭku eṉṉum kuṉṟu ēnti
   kō nirai kāttavaṉ eṉṉum
   aḻum toḻum āvi aṉala vevvuyirkkum
   añcaṉa vaṇṇaṉē eṉṉum
   eḻuntu mēl nōkki imaippilaḷ irukkum
   eṅṅaṉē nōkkukēṉ? eṉṉum
   ceḻum taṭam puṉal cūḻ tiruvaraṅkattāy
   eṉ ceykēṉ eṉ tirumakaṭkē? (8)
   3471. Her mother worries and says,
   "My daughter says,
   ‘He is a tender shoot for the gods in the sky.’
   She says, ‘He carried Govardhana mountain
   and protected the cows.’
   She cries for him and worships him
   and her sighs are hot as fire.
   She says, ‘You have the color of kohl.’
   She just looks up and doesn’t even blink her eyes.
   She says, ‘Where should I look to find you?’
   You are the lord of Thiruvarangam
   surrounded by flourishing ponds filled with water.
   What should I do for my lovely daughter?"
   3472 eṉ tirumakaḷ cēr mārvaṉē eṉṉum
   eṉṉuṭai āviyē eṉṉum
   niṉ tiru eyiṟṟāl iṭantu nī koṇṭa
   nilamakaḷ kēḷvaṉē eṉṉum
   aṉṟu uru ēḻum taḻuvi nī koṇṭa
   āymakaḷ aṉpaṉē eṉṉum
   teṉ tiruvaraṅkam kōyilkoṇṭāṉē
   teḷikilēṉ muṭivu ivaḷ taṉakkē (9)
   3472. Her mother worries and says,
   "My daughter says,
   ‘You embrace lovely Lakshmi on your chest.’
   She says, ‘You are my life.’
   She says, ‘You are the beloved of the earth goddess
   whom you brought out from the underworld
   taking the form of a boar and splitting open the earth.’
   She says, ‘You conquered seven bulls
   to marry the cowherd girl Nappinnai
   and you are her beloved husband.’
   You stay in the temple of south Thiruvarangam.
   I don’t understand what will happen to my daughter."
   3473 muṭivu ivaḷ taṉakku oṉṟu aṟikilēṉ eṉṉum
   mūvulaku āḷiyē eṉṉum
   kaṭi kamaḻ koṉṟaic caṭaiyaṉē eṉṉum
   nāṉmukak kaṭavuḷē eṉṉum
   vaṭivu uṭai vāṉōr talaivaṉē eṉṉum
   vaṇ tiruvaraṅkaṉē eṉṉum
   aṭi aṭaiyātāḷ pōl ivaḷ aṇuki
   aṭaintaṉaḷ mukilvaṇṇaṉ aṭiyē (10)
   3473. Her mother worries and says,
   "My daughter says,
   ‘I don’t see any end to my suffering.’
   She says, ‘You are the ruler of all the three worlds.’
   She says, ‘You are Shiva, with a jata adorned with fragrant kondrai
   flowers.’
   She says, ‘You are the god Nanmuhan.’
   She says, ‘You are the god of the beautiful the gods in the sky.’
   She says, ‘You stay in flourishing Thiruvarangam.’
   She was not able to approach his feet
   but now she attains the feet of the cloud-colored god."
   3474 mukilvaṇṇaṉ aṭiyai aṭaintu aruḷ cūṭi
   uyntavaṉ moy puṉal porunal
   tukil vaṇṇat tū nīrc cērppaṉ vaṇ poḻil cūḻ
   vaṇ kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ
   mukilvaṇṇaṉ aṭimēl coṉṉa col mālai
   āyirattu ip pattum vallār
   mukil vaṇṇa vāṉattu imaiyavar cūḻa
   iruppar pēriṉpa veḷḷattē (11)
   3474. Sadagopan of Thirukuruhur on the bank of a river
   with abundant blue water surrounded by flourishing groves
   composed a garland of a thousand pasurams
   on the feet of the cloud-colored god.
   If devotees learn these ten poems and recite them
   they will reach the blue sky with clouds
   and stay with the god in a flood of bliss.
   -------------
   tiruvāymoḻi eḻām pattu (mūṉṟām tirumoḻi, 3475-3485)
   tāymārum tōḻimārum uṟṟārum taṭukkavum talaivi
   tiruppērēyil cērat tuṇital (tiruppēreyil)
   3475 veḷḷaic curi caṅkoṭu āḻi ēnti
   tāmaraik kaṇṇaṉ eṉ neñciṉūṭē
   puḷḷaik kaṭākiṉṟa āṟṟaik kāṇīr
   eṉ collic collukēṉ aṉṉaimīrkāḷ?
   veḷḷac cukam avaṉ vīṟṟirunta
   vēta oliyum viḻā oliyum
   piḷḷaik kuḻā viḷaiyāṭṭu oliyum
   aṟā tiruppēreyil cērvaṉ nāṉē (1)
   3475. Her daughter says,
   "O Mothers, the lotus-eyed god Kaṇṇan
   carrying a curved white conch and a discus
   entered my heart riding on Garuḍa.
   How can I describe how it was?
   The sound of the parrots, the divine sound of the Vedas,
   the loud noise of festivals
   and the sound of children’s play
   never stop in Thirupereyil.
   When will I go and join that place
   where the god stays giving grace like a flood."
   3476 nāṉak karuṅ kuḻal tōḻimīrkāḷ
   aṉṉaiyarkāḷ ayal cēriyīrkāḷ
   nāṉ it taṉi neñcam kākkamāṭṭēṉ
   eṉ vacam aṉṟu itu irāppakal pōy
   tēṉ moytta pūmpoḻil taṇ paṇai cūḻ
   teṉ tiruppēreyil vīṟṟirunta
   vāṉap pirāṉ maṇivaṇṇaṉ kaṇṇaṉ
   ceṅkaṉi vāyiṉ tiṟattatuvē (2)
   3476. She says,
   "O my friends, your hair is dark and fragrant.
   O my mothers, O people of the village,
   I cannot keep my heart with me.
   It has gone from me to Kaṇṇan
   and stays with him night and day.
   I cannot bear being alone without my heart.
   He stays in southern Thiruppereyil
   filled with cool fields and blooming groves swarming with bees.
   My heart has fallen for the beauty of the sweet fruit-like mouth
   of the sapphire-colored lord of the gods in the sky."
   3477 ceṅkaṉi vāyiṉ tiṟattatāyum
   ceñ cuṭar nīḷ muṭi tāḻntatāyum
   caṅkoṭu cakkaram kaṇṭu ukantum
   tāmaraik kaṇkaḷukku aṟṟut tīrntum
   tiṅkaḷum nāḷum viḻā aṟāta
   teṉ tiruppēreyil vīṟṟirunta
   naṅkaḷ pirāṉukku eṉ neñcam tōḻī
   nāṇum niṟaiyum iḻantatuvē (3)
   3477. She says,
   "O my friends! My heart rejoices.
   It has fallen for the beauty of his sweet fruit-like mouth,
   his long shining hair, his conch and discus and his lotus eyes.
   He stays in southern Thiruperur
   where festivals go on every day of every month.
   My heart has lost its modesty and chastity for our lord."
   3478 iḻanta em māmaittiṟattup pōṉa
   eṉ neñciṉārum aṅkē oḻintār
   uḻantu iṉi yāraikkoṇṭu eṉ ucākō?
   ōtak kaṭal oli pōla eṅkum
   eḻunta nal vētattu oli niṉṟu ōṅku
   teṉ tiruppēreyil vīṟṟirunta
   muḻaṅku caṅkak kaiyaṉ māyattu āḻntēṉ
   aṉṉaiyarkāḷ eṉṉai eṉ muṉintē? (4)
   3478. She says,
   "O mothers,
   my heart went to him to bring back the dark color that I lost,
   but it stays there with him.
   Who can I send to find out what has happened to it?
   The lord carrying the sounding conch in his hands
   stays in southern Thirupperiyil
   where the recitation the good Vedas spreads everywhere
   like the roaring sound of the ocean.
   I fell into his maayam.
   O mothers, what is the use of getting mad at me?"
   3479 muṉintu cakaṭam utaittu māyap
   pēy mulai uṇṭu marutu iṭai pōy
   kaṉinta viḷavukkuk kaṉṟu eṟinta
   kaṇṇa pirāṉukku eṉ peṇmai tōṟṟēṉ
   muṉintu iṉi eṉ ceytīr aṉṉaimīrkāḷ?
   muṉṉi avaṉ vantu vīṟṟirunta
   kaṉinta poḻil tiruppēreyiṟkē
   kālampeṟa eṉṉaik kāṭṭumiṉē (5)
   3479. She says,
   "O mothers,
   Kaṇṇan grew angry at Sakatasuran
   when he came in the form of a cart,
   kicked him and destroyed the cart.
   He drank milk from the breasts of the devil Putana.
   When two Raksasas came as marudu trees,
   he went in between them and destroyed them.
   Other Raksasas that came as calves
   were thrown by the lord at a Vilam tree and were killed.
   O mothers, I have lost my chastity to him.
   You are angry at me—what will you do?
   He stays in Thiruppereyil where sweet fruits ripen in the groves.
   Take me there and leave me.
   Don’t wait."
   3480 kālampeṟa eṉṉaik kāṭṭumiṉkaḷ
   kātal kaṭaliṉ mikap peritāl
   nīla mukil vaṇṇattu em perumāṉ
   niṟkum muṉṉē vantu eṉ kaikkum eytāṉ
   ñālattu avaṉ vantu vīṟṟirunta
   nāṉmaṟaiyāḷarum vēḷvi ōvā
   kōlac cenneṟkaḷ kavari vīcum
   kūṭu puṉal tiruppēreyiṟkē. (6)
   3480. Her daughter says,
   " O mothers! Love is larger than the ocean.
   The dark cloud-colored god came to me
   but I couldn’t catch him who was so dear with my hands.
   Don’t wait too long.
   Take me to Thiruppereyil surrounded by water
   where the ruler of the world stays
   and the sound of the Brahmins reciting the four Vedas
   and performing sacrifices spreads without ceasing everywhere.
   Good paddy plants flourish there waving in the wind."
   3481 pēr eyil cūḻ kaṭal teṉ ilaṅkai
   ceṟṟa pirāṉ vantu vīṟṟirunta
   pēreyiṟkē pukku eṉ neñcam nāṭi
   pērttu vara eṅkum kāṇamāṭṭēṉ
   ārai iṉi iṅku uṭaiyam tōḻī?
   eṉ neñcam kūva vallārum illai
   ārai iṉikkoṇṭu eṉ cātikkiṉṟatu?
   eṉ neñcam kaṇṭatuvē kaṇṭēṉē (7)
   3481. She says,
   "O friend, the lord of Thirupereyil
   who destroyed Lanka in the south
   surrounded by large forts and the ocean
   entered my heart
   but I haven’t seen him for a long time now.
   O my friend, who is there to help me?
   No one is strong enough to call the god to my heart.
   How can I find anyone to achieve anything?
   My heart thinks whatever it knows is the right thing."
   3482 kaṇṭatuvē koṇṭu ellārum kūṭi
   kārk kaṭal vaṇṇaṉōṭu eṉ tiṟattuk
   koṇṭu alar tūṟṟiṟṟu atu mutalāk
   koṇṭa eṉ kātal uraikkil tōḻī
   maṇ tiṇi ñālamum ēḻ kaṭalum
   nīḷ vicumpum kaḻiyap peritāl
   teṇ tirai cūḻntu avaṉ vīṟṟirunta
   teṉ tiruppēreyil cērvaṉ ceṉṟē (8)
   3482. She says,
   "O friend, when people see me,
   they get together and gossip about the love I have
   for the dark ocean-colored lord.
   Why should I worry about their gossip?
   My love for him is larger than this world filled with sand
   and the seven oceans and the wide sky.
   I will go to southern Thirupereyil
   surrounded by the ocean with its clear waves."
   3483 cērvaṉ ceṉṟu eṉṉuṭait tōḻimīrkāḷ
   aṉṉaiyarkāḷ eṉṉait tēṟṟa vēṇṭā
   nīrkaḷ uraikkiṉṟatu eṉ itaṟku?
   neñcum niṟaivum eṉakku iṅku illai
   kārvaṇṇaṉ kārk kaṭal ñālam uṇṭa
   kaṇṇa pirāṉ vantu vīṟṟirunta
   ēr vaḷa oṇ kaḻaṉip paḻaṉa
   teṉ tiruppēreyil mānakarē. (9)
   3483. She says,
   "O friends, mothers, I will go there and stay.
   Don’t convince me to stay here.
   Why do you want to stop me?
   My heart and my chastity don’t want to stay here.
   He is the dark ocean-colored lord Kaṇṇan
   and he swallowed the world surrounded by the dark ocean.
   He stays in wonderful southern Thirupereyil
   filled with flourishing paddy fields plowed by farmers."
   3484 nakaramum nāṭum piṟavum tērvēṉ
   nāṇ eṉakku illai eṉ tōḻimīrkāḷ
   cikara maṇi neṭu māṭam nīṭu
   teṉ tiruppēreyil vīṟṟirunta
   makara neṭuṅkuḻaik kātaṉ māyaṉ
   nūṟṟuvarai aṉṟu maṅka nūṟṟa
   nikar il mukilvaṇṇaṉ nēmiyāṉ eṉ
   neñcam kavarntu eṉai ūḻiyāṉē? (10)
   3484. She says,
   " O friends, I will go to all towns and lands to find him,
   I am not ashamed at all.
   He is the god Makara Neḍum Kuzhai Kaadar and the Maayan.
   He destroyed the Kauravas, the enemies of the Pandavas.
   He has the color of a cloud and carries a matchless discus.
   He attracted my heart.
   He is the god on the earth for many eons."
   3485 ūḻitōṟu ūḻi uruvum pērum
   ceykaiyum vēṟavaṉ vaiyam kākkum
   āḻi nīr vaṇṇaṉai accutaṉai
   aṇi kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ coṉṉa
   kēḻ il antāti ōr āyirattuḷ
   ivai tiruppēreyil mēya pattum
   āḻi aṅkaiyaṉai ētta vallār
   avar aṭimaittiṟattu āḻiyārē. (11)
   3485. Sadagopan of beautiful Thirukuruhur
   composed a thousand anthadi pasurams on Achudan,
   the ocean-colored god.
   The lord protects the earth and has many names,
   forms and deeds in every eon.
   If devotees learn these ten poems
   that praise the god of Thiruperelyil
   who holds a discus in his hand
   they will become his slaves.
   ------------
   tiruvāymoḻi eḻām pattu (nāṉkām tirumoḻi, 3486-3496)
   emperumāṉatu veṟṟic ceyalkaḷaip pēcutal
   3486 āḻi eḻa caṅkum villum eḻa ticai
   vāḻi eḻa taṇṭum vāḷum eḻa aṇṭam
   mōḻai eḻa muṭi pātam eḻa appaṉ
   ūḻi eḻa ulakam koṇṭavāṟē (1)
   3486. When he took the form of Thirivikraman
   to measure the world,
   his discus, his conch, his bow,his club and sword
   all appeared and everyone praised him everywhere.
   Our father’s head touched the sky
   and his feet touched the earth.
   This is the way the world and the eons appeared.
   3487 āṟu malaikku etirntu ōṭum oli aravu
   ūṟu culāy malai tēykkum oli kaṭal
   māṟu cuḻaṉṟu aḻaikkiṉṟa oli appaṉ
   cāṟupaṭa amutam koṇṭa nāṉṟē (2)
   3487. At the time when our father
   churned the milky ocean to take the nectar,
   the sound of many rivers that are born in the mountains
   and fall down to the earth
   and the sound of the churning of the ocean with Manthara mountain
   and the loud sound of the snake Vasuki, all spread everywhere.
   3488 nāṉṟila ēḻ maṇṇum tāṉattavē piṉṉum
   nāṉṟila ēḻ malai tāṉattavē piṉṉum
   nāṉṟila ēḻ kaṭal tāṉattavē appaṉ
   ūṉṟi iṭantu eyiṟṟil koṇṭa nāḷē (3)
   3488. At the time our father
   took the form of a boar and split open the earth,
   the seven worlds stayed where they were without moving.
   The seven mountains stayed without shaking.
   The seven oceans did not rise and were still.
   3489 nāḷum eḻa nilam nīrum eḻa viṇṇum
   kōḷum eḻa eri kālum eḻa malai
   tāḷum eḻa cuṭar tāṉum eḻa appaṉ
   ūḷi eḻa ulakam uṇṭa ūṇē (4)
   3489. When the world was ending
   our father swallowed the seven worlds,
   the oceans, the lands, the sky, the stars,
   fire, mountains, wind, moon and sun
   and then everything in the world appeared again.
   He protected them all in his stomach.
   3490 ūṇuṭai mallar tatarnta oli maṉṉar
   āṇ uṭaic cēṉai naṭuṅkum oli viṇṇuḷ
   ēṇ uṭait tēvar veḷippaṭṭa oli appaṉ
   kāṇuṭaip pāratam kai aṟai pōḻtē (5)
   3490. At the time when our father
   fought in the Bharatha war,
   the sound of the strong warriors getting killed,
   the sound of the trembling of the army,
   and the sound of all the gods
   as they came to see what was happening
   spread all over the world.
   3491 pōḻtu melinta puṉ cekkaril vāṉ ticai
   cūḻum eḻuntu utirap puṉalā malai
   kīḻtu piḷanta ciṅkam ottatāl appaṉ
   āḻ tuyar ceytu acuraraik kollumāṟē (6)
   3491. When our father took the form of a man-lion,
   and attacked Hiranyan and killed him
   the red blood that came out of the Asuran’s body
   looked like the red sky when the sun sets.
   The lord looked like a lion that came out of a mountain
   that had been split apart.
   3492 māṟu niraittu iraikkum caraṅkaḷ iṉa
   nūṟu piṇam malaipōl puraḷa kaṭal
   āṟu maṭuttu utirap puṉalā appaṉ
   nīṟu paṭa ilaṅkai ceṟṟa nērē (7)
   3492. When our father fought in Lanka
   and killed the Raksasas,
   the arrows were piled up everywhere
   and a flood of blood flowed like a river or an ocean.
   The bodies of the hundreds of elephants that were killed
   in the war piled up like a mountain.
   3493 nērcarintāṉ koṭik kōḻi koṇṭāṉ piṉṉum
   nērcarintāṉ eriyum aṉalōṉ piṉṉum
   nērcarintāṉ mukkaṇ mūrtti kaṇṭīr appaṉ
   nērcari vāṇaṉ tiṇtōḷ koṇṭa aṉṟē (8)
   3493. Vaanasuran came to fight with the god
   and lost the war and our father cut off his thousand strong arms.
   Murugan carrying a rooster flag
   and Agni, the god of fire
   and Shiva with an eye on his forehead
   came to help the Asuran
   and were all defeated in the battle.
   3494 aṉṟu maṇ nīr eri kāl viṇ malai mutal
   aṉṟu cuṭar iraṇṭu piṟavum piṉṉum
   aṉṟu maḻai uyir tēvum maṟṟum appaṉ
   aṉṟu mutal ulakam ceytatumē (9)
   3494. Our father created the earth,
   oceans, fire, wind, the sky, mountains,
   sun, moon, rain, all creatures and things in the world
   and the gods in the sky.
   Every thing in the world is only his creation.
   3495 mēy nirai kīḻ puka mā puraḷa cuṉai
   vāy niṟai nīr piḷiṟic coriya iṉa
   ā niraipāṭi aṅkē oṭuṅka appaṉ
   tī maḻai kāttu kuṉṟam eṭuttāṉē (10)
   3495. When there was a storm
   and the rain pounded down and the wind blew,
   and the water in the springs increased and overflowed,
   and the cattle that were grazing were terrified,
   our father carried Govardana mountain as an umbrella
   and protected the cows
   and they all hid under the mountain and were saved.
   3496 kuṉṟam eṭutta pirāṉ aṭiyāroṭum
   oṉṟi niṉṟa caṭakōpaṉ uraiceyal
   naṉṟi puṉainta ōr āyirattuḷ ivai
   veṉṟi tarum pattum mēvik kaṟpārkkē (11)
   3496. Sadagopan, the devotee of our god,
   composed a thousand good pasurams on our father.
   They describe how the lord carried Govardhana hill
   to protect the cows and cowherds.
   If devotees learn and recite these ten pasurams
   they will be successful in all their endeavors.
   -------------
   tiruvāymoḻi eḻām pattu (aintām tirumoḻi, 3497-3507)
   emperumāṉatu vipava avatāra kuṇaṅkaḷai aṉupavittu
   āḷākāta ulakattārai nōkki iraṅkutal
   3497 kaṟpār irāma pirāṉai allāl maṟṟum kaṟparō
   pul pā mutalā pul eṟumpu āti oṉṟu iṉṟiyē
   nal pāl ayōttiyil vāḻum carācaram muṟṟavum
   nal pālukku uyttaṉaṉ nāṉmukaṉār peṟṟa nāṭṭuḷē? (1)
   3497. In this world that was created by Nanmuhan
   Rama gave his grace to everything,
   from the ants to the grass,
   and all the creatures and things in Ayodhya,
   that move and do not move.
   If the devotees want to learn the stories about the gods,
   will they learn any other story about the gods except Rama’s?
   3498 nāṭṭil piṟantavar nāraṇaṟku āḷ aṉṟi āvarō
   nāṭṭil piṟantu paṭātaṉa paṭṭu maṉicarkkāy
   nāṭṭai naliyum arakkarai nāṭit taṭintiṭṭu
   nāṭṭai aḷittu uyyac ceytu naṭantamai kēṭṭumē? (2)
   3498. At the time when the Rakshasas
   afflicted the people of many lands,
   our lord was born on the earth,
   suffered for humankind
   searched for the Rakshasas and destroyed them.
   He saved the people and gave them back their lands.
   Could anyone become the devotee of any other god
   after hearing of his heroic deeds?
   3499 kēṭpārkaḷ kēcavaṉ kīrtti allāl maṟṟum kēṭparō
   kēṭpār cevi cuṭu kīḻmai vacaivukaḷē vaiyum
   cēṇpāl paḻam pakaivaṉ cicupālaṉ tiruvaṭi
   tāḷ pāl aṭainta taṉmai aṟivārai aṟintumē? (3)
   3499. Kaṇṇan destroyed Sisubalan
   but gave his grace to that Asuran
   even though he had said many evil things about him
   that hurt the ears of listeners.
   When his devotees hear the compassion of the lord
   they will praise only him.
   If the people hear the story of Sisupalan
   and how he reached the feet of the lord through the god’s compassion,
   they will not want to hear the fame of any gods other than our Kesavan.
   3500 taṉmai aṟipavar tām avaṟku āḷ aṉṟi āvarō
   paṉmaip paṭar poruḷ ātum il pāḻ neṭum kālattu
   naṉmaip puṉal paṇṇi nāṉmukaṉaip paṇṇi taṉṉuḷḷē
   toṉmai mayakkiya tōṟṟiya cūḻalkaḷ cintittē? (4)
   3500. In ancient times before the eon when there was nothing,
   the god created the good waters and Brahma,
   the creator of the creatures of the world.
   Wise men do not become the devotees of any gods but Kaṇṇan
   if they have learned how he created
   the ancient world when the eon began.
   3501 cūḻalkaḷ cintikkil māyaṉ kaḻal aṉṟi cūḻvarō
   āḻap perum puṉal taṉṉuḷ aḻuntiya ñālattait
   tāḻap paṭāmal taṉpāl oru kōṭṭiṭait tāṉ koṇṭa
   kēḻal tiru uru āyiṟṟuk kēṭṭum uṇarntumē? (5)
   3501. In pralaya time
   when the earth was submerged under the deep ocean,
   our god did not hesitate to take the form of a boar
   and bring the earth up from the underworld on one tusk.
   If anyone knows and understands this story of the boar,
   will he worship any god but the feet of the ankleted Maayan?
   3502 kēṭṭum uṇarntavar kēcavaṟku āḷ aṉṟi āvarō
   vāṭṭam ilā vaṇ kai māvali vātikka vātippuṇṭu
   īṭṭamkoḷ tēvarkaḷ ceṉṟu irantārkku iṭar nīkkiya
   kōṭṭu aṅkai vāmaṉaṉ āy ceyta kūttukkaḷ kaṇṭumē? (6)
   3502. Mahabali received abundant power
   because he was so generous to all,
   and he grew arrogant and afflicted the gods.
   When the gods went to the lord and asked for help
   he came as a dwarf to Mahabali,
   begged him for three feet of land,
   and measured the earth and the sky with his two feet,
   freeing the gods from the suffering Mahabali had given them.
   If devotees hear and understand the play of the god,
   how he extended his hands
   and begged for land from king Mahabali,
   they will not become the devotees of any god but Kesavan.
   3503 kaṇṭum teḷintum kaṟṟār kaṇṇaṟku āḷ aṉṟi āvarō
   vaṇṭu uṇ malart toṅkal mārkkaṇṭēyaṉukku vāḻum nāḷ
   iṇṭaic caṭaimuṭi īcaṉ uṭaṉkoṇṭu ucāc cella
   koṇṭu aṅku taṉṉoṭum koṇṭu uṭaṉ ceṉṟatu uṇarntumē? (7)
   3503. Shiva with jata promised Markandeyan,
   decorated with flower garlands swarming with bees
   that he would save him from Yama.
   He saved Markandeyan as he promised and took him to our god,
   and Kaṇṇan gave Markandeyan everlasting moksha.
   If devotees know and learn this story of Markandeya
   they will not become the devotees of any god except Kaṇṇan.
   3504 cella uṇarntavar celvaṉ taṉ cīr aṉṟi kaṟparō
   ellai ilāta perum tavattāl pala cey miṟai
   allal amararaic ceyyum iraṇiyaṉ ākattai
   mallal ari uru āy ceyta māyam aṟintumē? (8)
   3504. Hiranyan performed limitless tapas and received many boons.
   With their power he caused great distress to the gods.
   Our lord came as a strong man-lion to the earth
   and tore open the chest of the Raksasa Hiranyan.
   If devotees know the superior power of our lord,
   they will not wish to learn anything except the greatness
   of our precious Kaṇṇan.
   3505 māyam aṟipavar māyavaṟku āḷ aṉṟi āvarō
   tāyam ceṟum oru nūṟṟuvar maṅka ōr aivarkku āy
   tēcam aṟiya ōr cāratiyāyc ceṉṟu cēṉaiyai
   nācam ceytiṭṭu naṭanta nal vārttai aṟintumē? (9)
   3505. The hundred Kauravas took everything the Paṇḍavas had
   by gambling and cheating them.
   The whole country knows that Kaṇṇan went as a charioteer
   and destroyed the Karuravas’ army on the battlefield.
   If devotees know what happened in the Bharatha war,
   will they become the devotee of any god
   other than Maayavan, the god with magical power?
   3506 vārttai aṟipavar māyavaṟku āḷ aṉṟi āvarō
   pōrtta piṟappoṭu nōyoṭu mūppoṭu iṟappu ivai
   pērttu perum tuṉpam vēr aṟa nīkki taṉ tāḷiṉkīḻc
   cērttu avaṉ ceyyum cēmattai eṇṇit teḷivuṟṟē? (10)
   3506. He removes the troubles
   of birth, sickness, old age and death for his devotees
   and makes them join his feet and protects them.
   If devotees understand the compassion of the god
   will they become the slave of any other god than Maayavan?
   3507 teḷivuṟṟu vīvu iṉṟi niṉṟavarkku iṉpak kati ceyyum
   teḷivuṟṟa kaṇṇaṉait teṉ kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ col
   teḷivuṟṟa āyirattuḷ ivai pattum vallār avar
   teḷivuṟṟa cintaiyar pā maru mūvulakattuḷḷē (11)
   3507. Sadagopan of southern Thirukuruhur
   composed a thousand pure pasurams on Kaṇṇan.
   If devotees believe that Kaṇṇan will surely give them moksha,
   he will give them the land of everlasting happiness.
   If they learn and recite these ten pasurams
   they will become devotees with faultless minds
   in all the three worlds.
   -----------
   tiruvāymoḻi eḻām pattu (āṟām tirumoḻi, 3508-3518)
   emperumāṉatu kuṇam aḻaku mutaliyavaṟṟil āḻvār
   īṭupaṭṭu avaṉaik kāṇumāṟu maṉam uruki aḻaittal
   3508 pā maru mūvulakum paṭaitta paṟpanāpā ō
   pā maru mūvulakum aḷanta paṟpa pātā ō
   tāmaraik kaṇṇā ō taṉiyēṉ taṉi āḷā ō
   tāmaraik kaiyā ō uṉṉai eṉṟukol cērvatuvē? (1)
   3508. Are you Padmanabhan?
   Did you create the three worlds?
   Did you measure the world and the sky
   with your lotus feet as a dwarf ?
   Are you the lotus-eyed Kaṇṇan?
   Are your hands as beautiful as lotuses?
   I am alone. When will I come and join you?
   3509 eṉṟukol cērvatu antō! araṉ nāṉmukaṉ ēttum ceyya
   niṉ tiruppātattai yāṉ? nilam nīr eri kāl viṇ uyir
   eṉṟu ivai tām mutalā muṟṟum āy niṉṟa entāy ō
   kuṉṟu eṭuttu ā nirai mēyttu avai kātta em kūttā ō! (2)
   3509. You are our father
   and you contain in your body
   earth, water, fire, wind and sky.
   You created them and you are all of them.
   You are a dancer and you grazed the cows
   and protected them from the storm
   by carrying Govardhana mountain as an umbrella.
   Alas! When will I reach your divine feet
   that are praised by Shiva and Nanmuhan?
   3510 kātta em kūttā ō! malai ēntik kal māri taṉṉai
   pūt taṇ tuḻāy muṭiyāy puṉai koṉṟai am ceñcaṭaiyāy
   vāytta eṉ nāṉmukaṉē vantu eṉ ār uyir nī āṉāl
   ēttu arum kīrttiyiṉāy! uṉṉai eṅkut talaippeyvaṉē? (3)
   3510. You are the dancer
   and you carried Govardhana mountain
   and protected the cows from the storm.
   You wear a cool thulasi garland and flowers in your hair.
   You are Shiva whose jata is adorned with kondrai flowers.
   You came to me and you are my dear life.
   You are Nanmuhan the creator of the world.
   You have unlimited fame and are praised by all.
   Where can I join you?
   3511 eṅkut talaippeyvaṉ nāṉ eḻil mūvulakum nīyē
   aṅku uyar mukkaṇ pirāṉ pirama perumāṉ avaṉ nī
   vem katir vaccirak kai intiraṉ mutalāt teyvam nī;
   koṅku alar taṇ am tuḻāy muṭi eṉṉuṭaik kōvalaṉē? (4)
   3511. Where will I go to see you?
   You are the beautiful three worlds.
   You are the three-eyed highest Shiva and Brahma.
   Are you Indra with the heroic shining Vajrayudam in your hand
   and the other gods in the sky?
   You are a cowherd adorned with a cool blooming thulasi garland
   dripping with honey.
   3512 eṉṉuṭaik kōvalaṉē eṉ pollāk karumāṇikkamē
   uṉṉuṭai unti malar ulakam avai mūṉṟum parantu
   uṉṉuṭaic cōtiveḷḷattu akampāl uṉṉaik kaṇṭu koṇṭiṭṭu
   eṉṉuṭai ār uyirār eṅṅaṉēkol vantu eytuvarē? (5)
   3512. You are my mischievous cowherd.
   You are my dark diamond.
   All the three worlds were created by Brahma
   who stays on the lotus on your navel.
   You are a flood of light.
   You are my dear life.
   How can I find you in my heart and join you?
   3513 vantu eytumāṟu aṟiyēṉ malku nīlac cuṭar taḻaippa
   ceñcuṭarc cōtikaḷ pūttu oru māṇikkam cērvatu pōl
   antaramēl cempaṭṭōṭu aṭi unti kai mārpu kaṇ vāy
   ceñcuṭarc cōti viṭa uṟai eṉ tirumārpaṉaiyē (6)
   3513. Lakshmi is beautiful as a ruby
   and she stays on a blooming lotus on his chest
   wearing a red silk garment.
   I do not know how to reach the sapphire-colored lord
   staying with Lakshmi as his feet, navel, hands, chest, eyes
   and mouth all shine.
   3514 eṉ tirumārpaṉ taṉṉai eṉ malaimakaḷ kūṟaṉ taṉṉai
   eṉṟum eṉ nāmakaḷai akampāl koṇṭa nāṉmukaṉai
   niṉṟa cacipatiyai nilam kīṇṭu eyil mūṉṟu eritta
   veṉṟu pulaṉ turanta vicumpu āḷiyai kāṇēṉō? (7)
   3514. He keeps beautiful Lakshmi on his divine chest.
   His body contains Shiva who shares half of it
   with Girija the daughter of the Himalayas.
   He has on his navel Nanmuhan
   the beloved of the goddess of education.
   He is the lord of Indra, the beloved of Indrani.
   He split open the earth to bring back the earth goddess.
   He burned the three forts.
   Won’t I see him, the ruler of the sky?
   3515 āḷiyaik kāṇ pariyāy ari kāṇ nariyāy arakkar
   ūḷai iṭṭu aṉṟu ilaṅkai kaṭantu pilam pukku oḷippa
   mīḷi am puḷḷaik kaṭāy viṟal māliyaik koṉṟu piṉṉum
   āḷ uyar kuṉṟaṅkaḷ ceytu aṭarttāṉaiyum kāṇṭumkolō? (8)
   3515. When he came to attack Lanka
   the Raksasas ran and hid in caves,
   looking like horses terrified at seeing a Yaali
   or like foxes that, seeing a lion, run screaming and hide.
   He flew on Garuda, fought and killed Mali
   and the other Raksasas so their bodies were piled up like hills.
   When will I see my lord?
   3516 kāṇṭumkolō neñcamē! kaṭiya viṉaiyē muyalum
   āṇ tiṟal mīḷi moympiṉ arakkaṉ kulattait taṭintu
   mīṇṭum avaṉ tampikkē viri nīr ilaṅkai aruḷi
   āṇṭu taṉ cōti pukka amarar ariyēṟṟiṉaiyē? (9)
   3516. Rama destroyed the heroic lion-like Raksasa clan
   whose deeds were cruel.
   He gave the kingdom of Lanka surrounded by the oceans
   to Ravana’s brother Vibhishana.
   He ruled Ayodhya for many years
   and went to the sky to brighten heaven.
   O heart, when can I see Rama
   who is the lion among the gods?
   3517 ēṟṟu arum vaikuntattai aruḷum namakku āyar kulattu
   īṟṟu iḷam piḷḷai oṉṟāyp pukku māyaṅkaḷē iyaṟṟi
   kūṟṟu iyal kañcaṉaik koṉṟu aivarkku āy koṭum cēṉai taṭintu
   āṟṟal mikkāṉ periya parañcōti pukka ariyē (10)
   3517. As a young child Kaṇṇan was raised
   in a family of cowherds and did many magical deeds.
   He killed Kamsan, as cruel as Yama.
   He fought with a terrible Kaurava army to help the five Pandavas.
   He has abundant power and he is the highest divine light.
   He will give us moksha in Vaikuṇḍam that is hard
   3518 pukka ari uru āy avuṇaṉ uṭal kīṇṭu ukanta
   cakkarac celvaṉ taṉṉaik kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ coṉṉa
   mikka ōr āyirattuḷ ivai pattum vallār avarait
   tokku pallāṇṭu icaittu kavariceyvar ēḻaiyarē (11)
   3518. Saḍagopan composed a thousand pasurams
   on the god who carries a discus and took the form of a lion
   and split open the body of the Asuran Hiranyan.
   If devotees learn these ten pasurams and recite them
   they will be in heaven where beautiful women fan them
   and sing "Pallaṇḍu."
   ------------
   tiruvāymoḻi eḻām pattu (ēḻām tirumoḻi, 3519-3529)
   emperumāṉatu pēraḻakai uruveḷit tōṟṟattil kaṇṭa talaivi varunti
   uraittal
   3519 ēḻaiyar āvi uṇṇum iṇaik kūṟṟamkolō? aṟiyēṉ
   āḻi am kaṇṇa pirāṉ tirukkaṇkaḷkolō? aṟiyēṉ
   cūḻavum tāmarai nāḷ malar pōl vantu tōṉṟum kaṇṭīr
   tōḻiyarkāḷ aṉṉaimīr eṉ ceykēṉ tuyarāṭṭiyēṉē? (1)
   3519. Her daughter says,
   "Are his two eyes Yamas
   that have come to take away the life of me,
   a poor women? I do not know.
   Or are they the divine eyes of the lord Kaṇṇan
   who carries a shining discus? I do not know.
   See, two things come and appear
   like fresh blooming lotuses before me.
   O my friends, mothers!
   What will I do? I suffer."
   3520 āṭṭiyum tūṟṟiyum niṉṟu aṉṉaimīr eṉṉai nīr nalintu eṉ?
   māṭṭu uyar kaṟpakattiṉ valliyō? koḻuntō? aṟiyēṉ?
   īṭṭiya veṇṇey uṇṭāṉ tirumūkku eṉatu āviyuḷḷē
   māṭṭiya val viḷakkiṉ cuṭarāy niṟkum vāliyatē (2)
   3520. Her daughter says,
   "O mothers,
   what is the use of blaming me and scolding me?
   You just make me worry more.
   The divine nose of Kannan who ate so much butter
   entered my soul and shines like a bright light,
   but I’m not sure whether it is really his nose
   or a tall Karpaga creeper or a tender shoot."
   3521 vāliyatu ōr kaṉikol? viṉaiyāṭṭiyēṉ valviṉaikol?
   kōlam tiraḷ pavaḷak koḻum tuṇṭamkolō? aṟiyēṉ
   nīla neṭu mukil pōl tirumēṉi ammāṉ toṇṭaivāy
   ēlum ticaiyuḷ ellām vantu tōṉṟum eṉ iṉ uyirkkē (3)
   3521. Her daughter says,
   "Are his lips as red as a kovvai fruit?
   Are they lovely round coral stones?
   Have I done too much bad karma? I don’t know.
   The mouth sweet as a thondai fruit of the god
   who has a blue cloud-colored body
   appears everywhere in front of me
   and hurts my dear life."
   3522 iṉ uyirkku ēḻaiyarmēl vaḷaiyum iṇai nīla viṟkol
   maṉṉiya cīr mataṉaṉ karuppuc cilaikol mataṉaṉ
   taṉ uyirt tātai kaṇṇa perumāṉ puruvam? avaiyē
   eṉ uyir mēlaṉavāy aṭukiṉṟaṉa eṉṟum niṉṟē (4)
   3522. Her daughter says,
   "Are the eyebrows of the lord two blue bent bows
   that take away the precious lives of lovely girls?
   Or are they sugarcane bows
   of famous, everlasting Kama, the god of love?
   The eyebrows of the lord, the dear father of Kama,
   come to me and burn my precious heart and body."
   3523 eṉṟum niṉṟē tikaḻum ceyya īṉ cuṭar veṇ miṉṉukkol?
   aṉṟi eṉ āvi aṭum aṇi muttamkolō? aṟiyēṉ
   kuṉṟam eṭutta pirāṉ muṟuval eṉatu āvi aṭum
   oṉṟum aṟikiṉṟilēṉ aṉṉaimīr! eṉakku uyvu iṭamē (5)
   3523. Her daughter says,
   "Is the smile of the lord shining white lightning
   in the red sky?
   Are his teeth beautiful pearls that take away my life?
   I do not know.
   The smile of the lord who carried the Govardhana hills kills me.
   O mothers! I don’t know where I can go to survive."
   3524 uyvu iṭam ēḻaiyarkkum acurarkkum arakkarkaṭkum
   evviṭam eṉṟu ilaṅki makaram taḻaikkum taḷirkol
   pai viṭap pāmpu aṇaiyāṉ tiruk kuṇṭalak kātukaḷē?
   kaiviṭal oṉṟum iṉṟi aṭukiṉṟaṉa kāṇmiṉkaḷē (6)
   3524. Her daughter says,
   "The lord sleeps on a snake bed.
   See, his divine ears, ornamented with beautiful earrings, ask,
   ‘What place is safe for the innocent girls who love the god,
   and what place is safe for the Asurans and the Raksasas
   from the god who is their enemy?’
   Those tender shoot-like ears burn me without stopping."
   3525 kāṇmiṉkaḷ aṉṉaiyarkāḷ eṉṟu kāṭṭum vakai aṟiyēṉ
   nāḷ maṉṉu veṇ tiṅkaḷ kol nayantārkaṭku naccu ilaikol
   cēṇ maṉṉu nāl taṭam tōḷ perumāṉ taṉ tiru nutalē?
   kōḷ maṉṉi āvi aṭum koṭiyēṉ uyir kōḷ iḻaittē (7)
   3525. Her daughter says,
   "O mother, see,
   I don’t know how to show you how I suffer from love.
   Is the white moon that rises every day
   poison for those who love someone?
   The divine forehead of the lord
   who has four beautiful strong arms
   takes away my life.
   Surely I have done bad karma."
   3526 kōḷ iḻait tāmaraiyum koṭiyum pavaḷamum villum
   kōḷ iḻait taṇ muttamum taḷirum kuḷir vāṉ piṟaiyum
   kōḷ iḻaiyā uṭaiya koḻum cōtivaṭṭam kol kaṇṇaṉ
   kōḷ iḻai vāḷ mukamāy koṭiyēṉ uyir koḷkiṉṟatē? (8)
   3526. Her daughter says,
   "Is his faultless shining face a round circle
   that is a fresh-petaled lotus with a vine inside it,
   and a coral, a bow, cool beautiful pearls,
   tender shoots and the cool crescent moon in the sky?
   It comes in front of me and kills me.
   I have done bad karma."
   3527 koḷkiṉṟa kōḷ iruḷaic cukirntiṭṭa koḻum curuḷiṉ
   uḷkoṇṭa nīla nal nūl taḻaikol? aṉṟu māyaṉ kuḻal
   viḷkiṉṟa pūn taṇ tuḻāy virai nāṟa vantu eṉ uyiraik
   kaḷkiṉṟavāṟu aṟiyīr aṉṉaimīr! kaḻaṟā niṟṟirē (9)
   3527. Her daughter says,
   "O mothers! Is his hair a bundle of black threads,
   with luxurious curls parting the darkness with its stars?
   The beautiful sound of the flute of Maayan
   adorned with a fresh cool thulasi garland
   comes spreading fragrance and steals my dear life.
   You do not understand my trouble.
   You just stand here and scold me."
   3528 niṟṟi muṟṟattuḷ eṉṟu neritta kaiyar āy eṉṉai nīr
   cuṟṟiyum cūḻntum vaitir cuṭarc cōti maṇi niṟam āy
   muṟṟa im mūvulakum virikiṉṟa cuṭar muṭikkē
   oṟṟumai koṇṭatu uḷḷam aṉṉaimīr nacai eṉ nuṅkaṭkē? (10)
   3528. Her daughter says,
   "He enters my yard holding his hands together,
   and circles around me.
   My heart has fallen in love with the bright crown
   of the dark shining diamond-colored lord
   that spreads its light in all the three worlds.
   O mothers, what do you want me to do?"
   3529 kaṭku ariya piramaṉ civaṉ intiraṉ eṉṟu ivarkkum
   kaṭku ariya kaṇṇaṉaik kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ coṉṉa
   uṭku uṭai āyirattuḷ ivaiyum oru pattum vallār
   uṭku uṭai vāṉavarōṭu uṭaṉāy eṉṟum māyārē (11)
   3529. Saḍagopan of Thirukuruhur
   composed a thousand poems
   on the dark-colored Kaṇṇan
   whom even Brahma, Shiva and Indra cannot see.
   If devotees learn and recite these ten pasurams
   they will go to the sky and stay with the everlasting gods
   and will never die.
   ---------
   tiruvāymoḻi eḻām pattu (eṭṭām tirumoḻi, 3530-3540)
   emperumāṉatu vicittira vipūtiyaik kaṇṭu āḻvār āccariyappaṭutal
   3530 māyā vāmaṉaṉē matucūtā nī aruḷāy
   tī āy nīr āy nilaṉ āy vicumpu āy kāl āy
   tāy āy tantai āy makkaḷ āy maṟṟum āy muṟṟum āy
   nī āy nī niṉṟavāṟu ivai eṉṉa niyāyaṅkaḷē (1)
   3530. You are Maayan.
   You took the form of a dwarf.
   You are Madhusudhanan.
   Give us your grace.
   You are the fire, water, land, sky and the wind.
   You are our mother, father, our children and all other things.
   You are all the forms in the world,
   but you are yourself different.
   Look—is this fair?
   3531 am kaḷ malart taṇ tuḻāy muṭi accutaṉē aruḷāy
   tiṅkaḷum ñāyiṟum āy ceḻum pal cuṭar āy iruḷ āy
   poṅku poḻi maḻai āy pukaḻ āy paḻi āy piṉṉum nī
   vem kaṇ vem kūṟṟamum ām ivai eṉṉa vicittiramē (2)
   3531. You are Achudan
   adorned with a cool blooming thulasi garland.
   Give us your grace.
   You are the moon, sun, the many shining stars,
   night, pouring rain, fame and disgrace.
   You are cruel strong cruel Yama.
   What is this wonder!
   3532 cittirat tēr valavā tiruc cakkarattāy aruḷāy
   ettaṉai ōr ukamum avai āy avaṟṟuḷ iyalum
   otta ōṇ pal poruḷkaḷ ulappu illaṉa āy viyavu āy
   vittakattāy niṟṟi nī ivai eṉṉa viṭamaṅkaḷē (3)
   3532. You drove the beautiful chariot in the Bharatha war.
   You carry the divine discus.
   Give us your grace.
   You are all the yugas
   and you are everything that is in the world.
   You make all things function.
   You make all things have the same nature,
   but you also make them different.
   You are clever.
   What kind of similarities and differences are these?
   3533 kaḷ aviḻ tāmaraikkaṇ kaṇṇaṉē eṉakku oṉṟu aruḷāy
   uḷḷatum illatum āy ulappu illaṉa āy viyavu āy
   veḷḷat taṭam kaṭaluḷ viṭa nāku aṇaimēl maruvi
   uḷḷap pal yōku ceyti ivai eṉṉa upāyaṅkaḷē (4)
   3533. You are Kaṇṇan
   and your eyes are as beautiful as lotuses that drip honey.
   Give me your grace.
   You are what is and what is not.
   You are things that move and things and that do not.
   You sleep on a snake bed on the large watery ocean
   and stay in a yogic trance.
   What kind of tricks are these?
   3534 pācaṅkaḷ nīkki eṉṉai uṉakkē aṟak koṇṭiṭṭu nī
   vāca malart taṇ tuḻāy muṭi māyavaṉē aruḷāy
   kāyamum cīvaṉum āy kaḻivu āy piṟappu āy piṉṉum nī
   māyaṅkaḷ ceytu vaitti ivai eṉṉa mayakkukkaḷē (5)
   3534. Give me your grace
   so I may leave all desires
   and be only your devotee.
   O Maayavan, you wear fragrant flowers
   and a fresh thulasi garland in your hair.
   You cause me to be born in this world
   with a body and life
   and you keep me here with your maayams.
   What are these tricks?
   3535 mayakkā vāmaṉaṉē mati ām vaṇṇam oṉṟu aruḷāy
   ayarppu āy tēṟṟamum āy aḻal āy kuḷir āy viyavu āy
   viyappu āy veṉṟikaḷ āy viṉai āy payaṉ āy piṉṉum nī
   tuyakku āy nī niṉṟavāṟu ivai eṉṉa tuyaraṅkaḷē (6)
   3535. You are the cause of confusion. You are a dwarf.
   Give me the knowledge of knowing only you.
   You are weariness.
   You are wakefulness.
   You are fire and cold.
   You are wonders and victories.
   You give karma and its results.
   You yourself are confusion.
   Why do you cause us to be confused?
   3536 tuyaraṅkaḷ ceyyum kaṇṇā cuṭar nīḷ muṭiyāy aruḷāy
   tuyaram cey māṉaṅkaḷ āy mataṉ āki ukavaikaḷ āy
   tuyaram cey kāmaṅkaḷ āy tulai āy nilai āy naṭai āy
   tuyaraṅkaḷ ceytu vaitti ivai eṉṉa cuṇṭāyaṅkaḷē (7)
   3536. O Kaṇṇan,
   you have long shining hair.
   You confuse us. Give us your grace.
   You are the source of the desires that make us sad.
   You are the passions that we have.
   You are far away and everlasting.
   You are everything that happens.
   Is this all your play?
   3537 eṉṉa cuṇṭāyaṅkaḷāl niṉṟiṭṭāy eṉṉai āḷum kaṇṇā?
   iṉṉatu ōr taṉmaiyai eṉṟu uṉṉai yāvarkkum tēṟṟariyai
   muṉṉiya mūvulakum avai āy avaṟṟaip paṭaittu
   piṉṉum uḷḷāy puṟattāy! ivai eṉṉa iyaṟkaikaḷē (8)
   3537. O Kaṇṇan, you rule us.
   You play many games
   but what do you gain from them?
   No one knows who you are.
   You created all the three worlds and everything in them
   and you are both in them and out of them.
   What is this nature of yours?
   3538 eṉṉa iyaṟkaikaḷāl eṅṅaṉē niṉṟiṭṭāy eṉ kaṇṇā?
   tuṉṉu karacaraṇam mutalāka ellā uṟuppum
   uṉṉu cuvai oḷi ūṟu oli nāṟṟam muṟṟum nīyē
   uṉṉai uṇaravuṟil ulappu illai nuṇukkaṅkaḷē (9)
   3538. O my Kaṇṇan,
   what is your nature? Where are you?
   You are all parts of us, our hands and legs.
   You are taste, sight, feeling, sound and smell.
   If we want to know all the things that you are
   there is no limit to them—
   they may even be minute.
   3539 illai nuṇukkaṅkaḷē itaṉil piṟitu eṉṉum vaṇṇam
   tollai nal nūlil coṉṉa uruvum aruvum nīyē
   allit tuḻāy alaṅkal aṇi mārpa eṉ accutaṉē
   vallatu ōr vaṇṇam coṉṉāl atuvē uṉakku ām vaṇṇamē (10)
   3539. The ancient and excellent sastras
   describe your good nature—
   there is nothing better than they to describe you.
   You are form and formlessness.
   Your chest is adorned with a thulasi garland and lotus flowers.
   You are my Achudan.
   If any sastras describe the nature of any god
   that nature is yours also.
   3540 ām vaṇṇam iṉṉatu oṉṟu eṉṟu aṟivatu ariya ariyai
   ām vaṇṇattāl kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ aṟintu uraitta
   ām vaṇṇa oṇ tamiḻkaḷ ivai āyirattuḷ ip pattum
   ām vaṇṇattāl uraippār amaintār tamakku eṉṟaikkumē (11)
   3540. Saḍagopan of Thirukuruhur
   composed a thousand beautiful Tamil pasurams
   on the lord whose nature no one knows.
   If devotees learn and recite beautifully
   these ten Tamil pasurams on the nature of the lord
   that the poet understands
   they will be always the dear devotees of the god.
   ------------
   tiruvāymoḻi eḻām pattu (oṉpatām tirumoḻi, 3541-3551)
   iṉkavi pāṭum pēṟṟai emperumāṉ tamakku aruḷiyamaikkuk kaimmāṟu illai
   eṉal
   3541 eṉṟaikkum eṉṉai uyyakkoṇṭu pōkiya
   aṉṟaikku aṉṟu eṉṉait taṉṉākki eṉṉāl taṉṉai
   iṉ tamiḻ pāṭiya īcaṉai ātiyāy
   niṉṟa eṉ cōtiyai eṉ colli niṟpaṉō? (1)
   3541. He took me as his devotee forever.
   After he made me his,
   he made me compose sweet Tamil pasurams
   praising him, the ancient lord.
   He is the shining light.
   What can I say to worship him?
   3542 eṉ colli niṟpaṉ eṉ iṉ uyir iṉṟu oṉṟāy
   eṉ collāl yāṉ coṉṉa iṉ kavi eṉpittu
   taṉ collāl tāṉ taṉṉaik kīrttitta māyaṉ eṉ
   muṉ collum mūvuruvām mutalvaṉē? (2)
   3542. What should I say?
   He is my sweet life.
   He made me compose poems using my words
   but they are really his words.
   He made me famous
   because all people think that I have composed these poems.
   He is Maayan.
   He is first among the three gods
   and all the words I say are his.
   3543 ām mutalvaṉ ivaṉ eṉṟu taṉ tēṟṟi eṉ
   nā mutal vantu pukuntu nal iṉ kavi
   tū mutal pattarkkut tāṉ taṉṉaic coṉṉa eṉ
   vāy mutal appaṉai eṉṟu maṟappaṉō? (3)
   3543. He thought that I am a good poet
   and entered my tongue.
   He made me compose these sweet pasurams for his faultless devotees
   but he himself is the composer
   and he praised himself through my poems.
   He is my father. How could I forget him?
   3544 appaṉai eṉṟu maṟappaṉ eṉ ākiyē
   tapputal iṉṟi taṉaik kavi tāṉ colli
   oppilāt tīviṉaiyēṉai uyyakkoṇṭu
   ceppamē ceytu tirikiṉṟa cīrkaṇṭē? (4)
   3544. He himself composed faultless poems
   about himself through me.
   I have done many things too bad to describe.
   He saved me and I know that he gave me his grace
   and made me a good poet.
   He himself is me.
   How could I forget my father?
   3545 cīr kaṇṭukoṇṭu tiruntu nal iṉkavi
   nērpaṭa yāṉ collum nīrmai ilāmaiyil
   ērvu ilā eṉṉait taṉṉākki eṉṉāl taṉṉaip
   pār paravu iṉ kavi pāṭum paramarē (5)
   3545. He is the highest lord.
   He understood that I have no ability
   to compose sweet poems.
   I am a low one.
   He joined me with himself,
   and composed wonderful poems
   that are praised by the whole world.
   3546 iṉ kavi pāṭum param kavikaḷāl
   taṉ kavi tāṉ taṉṉaip pāṭuviyātu iṉṟu
   naṉku vantu eṉṉuṭaṉ ākki eṉṉāl taṉṉai
   vaṉ kavi pāṭum eṉ vaikunta nātaṉē (6)
   3546. The divine lord does not compose
   sweet poems himself on himself.
   He came to me lovingly
   and made me compose poems about him.
   He is the lord of Vaikuṇṭam
   and he sings beautiful poems on himself through me.
   3547 vaikunta nātaṉ eṉa valviṉai māyntu aṟac
   cey kuntaṉ taṉṉai eṉ ākki eṉṉāl taṉṉai
   vaikuntaṉ ākap pukaḻa vaṇ tīm kavi
   cey kuntaṉ taṉṉai en nāḷ cintittu ārvaṉō? (7)
   3547. The lord of Vaikuṇṭam destroyed my bad karma
   and made me a good person.
   He made me compose sweet poems
   describing him as the lord of Vaikuṇṭam
   and he is praised by all through these poems.
   My mind will not be satisfied
   even if I praise him forever in sweet poems.
   3548 ārvaṉō āḻi aṅkai em pirāṉ pukaḻ
   pār viṇ nīr muṟṟum kalantu parukilum
   ērvu ilā eṉṉait taṉṉākki eṉṉāl taṉṉaic
   cīrpeṟa iṉ kavi coṉṉa tiṟattukkē? (8)
   3548. My lord carries a discus in his beautiful hands.
   I am not fit to compose poems on him
   but he joined me with himself
   and gave me the ability to compose sweet poems on him.
   Even if someone puts together the world, sky and water
   and praises the lord, it is not sufficient for the fame of the lord.
   3549 tiṟattukku ēy tuppuravu ām tirumāliṉ cīr
   iṟappu etir kālam parukilum ārvaṉō
   maṟappu ilā eṉṉait taṉṉākki eṉṉāl taṉṉai
   uṟap pala iṉ kavi coṉṉa utavikkē? (9)
   3549. He did me a great service.
   He did not forget me
   but accepted me as his devotee
   and gave me his grace to compose many sweet poems on him.
   Even if I praise his past, present and future greatness
   and enjoy it, it is not enough to praise him.
   How can I repay him for his help?
   3550 utavik kaimmāṟu eṉ uyir eṉṉa uṟṟu eṇṇil
   atuvum maṟṟu āṅkavaṉ taṉṉatu eṉṉāl taṉṉaip
   pataviya iṉ kavi pāṭiya appaṉukku
   etuvum oṉṟum illai ceyvatu iṅkum aṅkē (10)
   3550. If I want to give my life to him
   for the things he did for me
   even that is not enough
   because he created me and my life is his.
   He composed sweet pasurams on himself through me.
   I do not have anything to give to my father in return
   in this world or in the sky
   for the things that he has done for me.
   3551 iṅkum aṅkum tirumāl aṉṟi iṉmai kaṇṭu
   aṅṅaṉē vaṇ kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ
   iṅṅaṉē coṉṉa ōr āyirattu ip pattum
   eṅṅaṉē colliṉum iṉpam payakkumē (11)
   3551. Sadagopan of flourishing Thirukuruhur
   knows that there is no place
   where the lord does not exist
   and that he is omnipresent.
   He composed a thousand pasurams on the lord.
   Wherever devotees stay
   and however they recite these ten poems,
   they will obtain the joy of reaching the god.
   -----------
   tiruvāymoḻi eḻām pattu (pattām tirumoḻi, 3552-3562)
   tiruvāṟaṉviḷai ceṉṟu emperumāṉaik kaṇṭu āḻvār
   aṭimaiceyyak karututal (tiruvāṟaṉviḷai)
   3552 iṉpam payakka eḻil malar mātarum tāṉum
   iv ēḻ ulakai
   iṉpam payakka iṉitu uṭaṉ vīṟṟiruntu
   āḷkiṉṟa eṅkaḷ pirāṉ
   aṉpuṟṟu amarntu uṟaikiṉṟa aṇi poḻil
   cūḻ tiruvāṟaṉviḷai
   aṉpuṟṟu amarntu valañceytu kaitoḻum
   nāḷkaḷum ākumkolō? (1)
   3552. Our lord rules this world and gives happiness to all.
   He stays with Lakshmi
   who gives joy to all creatures and abides on a beautiful lotus.
   When will the day come when I can go to Thiruvaaṛanviḷai
   surrounded with beautiful groves
   where the lord stays happily
   and circle around the hill and worship him?
   3553 ākumkol aiyam oṉṟu iṉṟi? akal iṭam
   muṟṟavum īr aṭiyē
   ākumparicu nimirnta tirukkuṟaḷ appaṉ
   amarntu uṟaiyum
   mākam tikaḻ koṭi māṭaṅkaḷ nīṭu
   matiḷ tiruvāṟaṉviḷai
   mā kanta nīrkoṇṭu tūvi valañceytu
   kaitoḻak kūṭumkolō? (2)
   3553. The lord took the form of a divine dwarf
   and, without any hesitation, measured the wide world
   and the sky with his two feet.
   He is lord of Thiruvaaṛanviḷai surrounded by tall walls
   and filled with palaces where shining flags fly and touch the sky.
   When will the time come that I can go there
   with fragrant water and sprinkle it
   and circle the hill and worship him folding my hands?
   3554 kūṭum kol vaikalum? kōvintaṉai
   matucūtaṉai kōḷariyai
   āṭum paṟavaimicaik kaṇṭu kaitoḻutu
   aṉṟi avaṉ uṟaiyum
   pāṭum perum pukaḻ nāṉmaṟai vēḷvi aintu
   āṟu aṅkam paṉṉiṉar vāḻ
   nīṭu poḻil tiruvāṟaṉviḷai toḻa
   vāykkumkol niccalumē? (3)
   3554. The god Govindan, Madhusudhanan, the man-lion
   stays riding on Garudan in Thiruvaaṛanviḷai surrounded with tall groves
   where Brahmins recite the four famous Vedas
   and six Upanishads and perform sacrifices.
   Will I be able to go there and worship him every day?
   3555 vāykkumkol niccalum eppoḻutum maṉattu
   īṅku niṉaikkappeṟa
   vāykkum karumpum perum cennelum
   vayal cūḻ tiruvāṟaṉviḷai
   vāykkum perum pukaḻ mūvulaku īcaṉ
   vaṭamaturaip piṟanta
   vāykkum maṇi niṟak kaṇṇa pirāṉ taṉ
   malar aṭippōtukaḷē? (4)
   3555. The famous Kanṇapiraan,
   the sapphire-colored god of all the three worlds
   was born in northern Madura
   and stays in Thiruvaaṛanviḷai
   surrounded by sugarcane and good paddy lands.
   Will I able to go and worship his lotus feet every day
   just as I worship him in my mind here?
   3556 malar aṭippōtukaḷ eṉ neñcattu eppoḻutum
   irutti vaṇaṅka
   palar aṭiyār muṉpu aruḷiya pāmpu aṇai appaṉ
   amarntu uṟaiyum
   malariṉ maṇi neṭu māṭaṅkaḷ nīṭu
   matiḷ tiruvāṟaṉviḷai
   ulakam mali pukaḻ pāṭa nammēl viṉai
   oṉṟum nillā keṭumē. (5)
   3556. My father sleeps on a snake bed
   and gives his grace to many devotees.
   He stays in Thiruvaaṛanviḷai surrounded by tall walls
   and high palaces studded with jewels and flowers.
   If I keep his lotus-like feet in my heart always,
   worship him and sing his fame that spreads in all the worlds,
   all my karma will be destroyed and go away.
   3557 oṉṟum nillā keṭum muṟṟavum tīviṉai uḷḷit
   toḻumiṉ toṇṭīr!
   aṉṟu aṅku amar veṉṟu uruppiṇi naṅkai
   aṇi neṭum tōḷ puṇarntāṉ
   eṉṟum eppōtum eṉ neñcam tutippa
   uḷḷē irukkiṉṟa pirāṉ
   niṉṟa aṇi tiruvāṟaṉviḷai eṉṉum
   nīḷ nakaram atuvē (6)
   3557. He fought with Sisubalan, brought Rukmani
   and embraced her lovely round arms.
   I worship him and he stays in my heart all days and all times.
   He is the god of beautiful Thiruvaaṛanviḷai.
   O devotees!
   If you praise his fame that the whole world praises abundantly,
   all your bad karma will go away.
   3558 nīḷ nakaram atuvē malarc cōlaikaḷ
   cūḻ tiruvāṟaṉviḷai
   nīḷ nakarattu uṟaikiṉṟa pirāṉ neṭumāl
   kaṇṇaṉ viṇṇavar kōṉ
   vāṇapuram pukku mukkaṇ pirāṉait tolaiya
   vem pōrkaḷ ceytu
   vāṇaṉai āyiram tōḷ tuṇittāṉ caraṇ
   aṉṟi maṟṟu oṉṟu ilamē (7)
   3558. Neḍumaal, Kaṇṇan, the king of the gods in the sky,
   went to the kingdom of Vaaṇan, fought a cruel war with the Asuran
   and cut off his thousand arms.
   Three-eyed Shiva and his son Karthikeya came to help Vaanan
   but they retreated and ran away from the battlefield.
   There is no other refuge than the feet of the god
   of great Thiruvaaṛanviḷai
   surrounded by groves blooming with flowers.
   3559 aṉṟi maṟṟu oṉṟu ilam niṉ caraṇē eṉṟu
   akal irum poykaiyiṉvāy
   niṉṟu taṉ nīḷ kaḻal ēttiya āṉaiyiṉ
   neñcu iṭar tīrtta pirāṉ
   ceṉṟu aṅku iṉitu uṟaikiṉṟa ceḻum poḻil
   cūḻ tiruvāṟaṉviḷai
   oṉṟi valañceyya oṉṟumō? tīviṉai
   uḷḷattiṉ cārvu allavē (8)
   3559. The elephant Gajendra stood on the bank of the pond
   worshiped his divine ankleted feet and called him saying,
   "There is no refuge for me but you."
   He went there, saved him from the crocodile
   and removed his affliction.
   He stays majestically in Thiruvaṛanviḷai
   surrounded by flourishing groves.
   If you go there and circle the hill
   the bad karma that troubles your mind will go away.
   3560 tīviṉai uḷḷattiṉ cārvu alla āki
   teḷi vicumpu ēṟaluṟṟāl
   nāviṉuḷḷum uḷḷattuḷḷum amainta
   toḻiliṉuḷḷum naviṉṟu
   yāvarum vantu vaṇaṅkum poḻil
   tiruvāṟaṉviḷai ataṉai
   mēvi valañceytu kaitoḻak kūṭumkol?
   eṉṉum eṉ cintaṉaiyē (9)
   3560. Even if my bad karma is removed
   and I am able to go to heaven
   I will only want to go to Thiruvaṛanviḷai
   surrounded with groves
   where all the devotees come and worship him
   with their tongues, hearts and all their actions.
   My heart suffers not knowing when I will be able to go,
   circle the hill there and worship him.
   3561 cintai maṟṟoṉṟiṉ tiṟattatu allāt taṉmai
   tēva pirāṉ aṟiyum
   cintaiyiṉāl ceyva tāṉ aṟiyātaṉa
   māyaṅkaḷ oṉṟum illai
   cintaiyiṉāl colliṉāl ceykaiyāl nilattēvar
   kuḻu vaṇaṅkum
   cintai makiḻ tiruvāṟaṉviḷai uṟai
   tīrttaṉukku aṟṟa piṉṉē (10)
   3561. The god of the gods knows that a person’s heart
   does not leave the thoughts it is involved in.
   There is nothing magical that one cannot achieve
   if he always thinks of that one thing.
   There is nothing that I cannot achieve
   after I give myself to the god of Thiruvaaṛanviḷai
   where the gods come to the earth and praise him
   with their minds and deeds.
   3562 tīrttaṉukku aṟṟapiṉ maṟṟu ōr caraṇ
   illai eṉṟu eṇṇi tīrttaṉukkē
   tīrtta maṉattaṉaṉ āki ceḻuṅ
   kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ coṉṉa
   tīrttaṅkaḷ āyirattuḷ ivai pattum
   vallārkaḷait tēvar vaikal
   tīrttaṅkaḷē eṉṟu pūcittu nalki
   uraippar tam tēviyarkkē (11)
   3562. Sadagopan from flourishing southern Thirukuruhur,
   giving his mind to the Theerthan
   and thinking that there is no other refuge except his feet,
   composed a thousand pasurams with a pure mind on him.
   Even the gods worship the devotees
   who learn and recite these ten poems
   and tell their dear wives about them.
   ---------------
                     ___________________________________

                tiruvāymoḻi eṭṭām pattu (3563 - 3672)
        Divyaprabandham - Thiruvaymozhi - Etṭām Pathu 3563 - 3672

   tiruvāymoḻi eṭṭām pattu (mutal tirumoḻi, 3563-3573)
   emperumāṉatu aṭiyār vacamākum nilaiyaiyum yāvaiyum
   tāṉākum nilaiyaiyum āḻvār caṅkittut tautal
   3563 tēvimār āvār tirumakaḷ pūmi
   ēva maṟṟu amarar āṭceyvār
   mēviya ulakam mūṉṟu avai āṭci
   vēṇṭu vēṇṭu uruvam niṉ uruvam
   pāviyēṉ taṉṉai aṭukiṉṟa kamalak
   kaṇṇatu ōr pavaḷa vāy maṇiyē
   āviyē amutē alai kaṭal kaṭainta
   appaṉē kāṇumāṟu aruḷāy (1)
   3563. The divine Lakshmi and other goddesses
   obey your orders and serve you.
   Your form rules all the three worlds and they all need you.
   I am your slave and I have done bad karma.
   You have beautiful lotus eyes
   and your coral mouth attracts me.
   You shine like a jewel.
   You are my soul. You are as sweet as nectar.
   You, my father, churn the milky ocean roaring with waves.
   Give me your grace—I long to see you.
   3564 kāṇumāṟu aruḷāy eṉṟu eṉṟē kalaṅki
   kaṇṇa nīr alamara viṉaiyēṉ
   pēṇumāṟu ellām pēṇi niṉ peyarē
   pitaṟṟumāṟu aruḷ eṉakku antō
   kāṇumāṟu aruḷāy kākuttā kaṇṇā
   toṇṭaṉēṉ kaṟpakak kaṉiyē
   pēṇuvār amutē periya taṇ puṉal cūḻ
   peru nilam eṭutta pērāḷā (2)
   3564. I have done bad karma.
   My eyes filled with tears, I worry and say,
   "Come and give me your grace so that I can see you!"
   and I prattle saying only your names.
   O Kakutstha, give me your grace—I long to see you.
   Kaṇṇan, I am your slave. You are the fruit of the Karpaga tree.
   You are nectar for those who worship you.
   You, the generous one, took the form of a boar,
   split open the earth and brought up the earth
   surrounded by oceans from the underworld.
   3565 eṭutta pērāḷaṉ nantakōpaṉ taṉ
   iṉ uyirc ciṟuvaṉē acōtaikku
   aṭutta pēriṉpak kula iḷam kaḷiṟē
   aṭiyaṉēṉ periya ammāṉē
   kaṭutta pōr avuṇaṉ uṭal iru piḷavāk
   kaiukir āṇṭa em kaṭalē
   aṭuttatu ōr uruvāy iṉṟu nī vārāy
   eṅṅaṉam tēṟuvar umarē? (3)
   3565. You were the small child of generous Nandagopan
   and you were as dear to him as his life.
   You were a bright little elephant cub for Yasodha
   and a great joy for cowherd families.
   You are a beloved mother for me your slave.
   You are the ocean of strength
   who used your nails and split into two pieces
   the body of the Asuran Hiranyan
   when he came to fight with you.
   Come in another form for us.
   Your devotees and the gods will be happy.
   3566 umar ukantu ukanta uruvam niṉ uruvam
   āki uṉ taṉakku aṉpar āṉār
   avar ukantu amarnta ceykai uṉ māyai
   aṟivu oṉṟum caṅkippaṉ viṉaiyēṉ
   amar atu paṇṇi akal iṭam puṭaicūḻ
   aṭu paṭai avitta ammāṉē
   amarar tam amutē acurarkaḷ nañcē
   eṉṉuṭai ār uyirēyō (4)
   3566. You took various forms that the gods wanted.
   They love you and are your friends.
   They do their deeds only through your maaya.
   I have done much karma.
   You, my father, fought with the Kauravas
   and conquered their army.
   You are nectar for the gods in the sky,
   and you are poison for the Asurans.
   You are my dear life.
   3567 ār uyirēyō akal iṭam muḻutum
   paṭaittu iṭantu uṇṭu umiḻntu aḷanta
   pēr uyirēyō periya nīr paṭaittu aṅku
   uṟaintu atu kaṭaintu aṭaittu uṭaitta
   cīr uyirēyō maṉicarkkut tēvar
   pōlat tēvarkkum tēvāvō
   ōr uyirēyō ulakaṅkaṭku ellām!
   uṉṉai nāṉ eṅku vantu uṟukō? (5)
   3567. You are my dear life.
   You, the great lord, created the world, broke it,
   swallowed it, spit it out and measured it.
   You, the great lord, created the milky ocean
   and churned it, and you sleep on it on a snake bed.
   You are the god of people
   and the god of the gods in the sky.
   You are the dear life of all the worlds.
   Where can I come to see you?
   3568 eṅku vantu uṟukō eṉṉai āḷvāṉē?
   ēḻ ulakaṅkaḷum nīyē
   aṅku avarkku amaitta teyvamum nīyē
   avaṟṟu avai karumamum nīyē
   poṅkiya puṟampāl poruḷ uḷavēlum
   avaiyumō nī iṉṉē āṉāl
   maṅkiya aṟivām nērppamum nīyē
   vāṉ pulaṉ iṟantatum nīyē (6)
   3568. Where will I find you?
   You are my ruler.
   You are all the seven worlds.
   You are whatever god anyone wants you to be.
   You are all the actions that people do.
   If there is anything beyond all these things, that is also you.
   You are formless. You are truth and sincerity.
   You are everything in the sky and above the sky.
   3569 iṟantatum nīyē etirntatum nīyē
   nikaḻvatō nī iṉṉē āṉāl
   ciṟanta niṉ taṉmai atu itu utu eṉṟu
   aṟivu oṉṟum caṅkippaṉ viṉaiyēṉ
   kaṟanta pāl neyyē neyyiṉ iṉ cuvaiyē
   kaṭaliṉuḷ amutamē amutil
   piṟanta iṉ cuvaiyē cuvaiyatu payaṉē
   piṉṉai tōḷ maṇanta pēr āyā (7)
   3569. You are past, present and future.
   I do not know whether your excellent nature
   is this, that, or in between. I have done bad karma.
   You are ghee made of fresh milk and its taste.
   You are the nectar that comes from the ocean and its sweet taste.
   You are the generous god who married Nappinnai
   and embraced her arms.
   3570 maṇanta pēr āyā māyattāl muḻutum
   valviṉaiyēṉai īrkiṉṟa
   kuṇaṅkaḷai uṭaiyāy acurar vaṉ kaiyar
   kūṟṟamē koṭiya puḷ uyarttāy
   paṇaṅkaḷ āyiramum uṭaiya pain nākap
   paḷḷiyāy pāṟkaṭal cērppā
   vaṇaṅkumāṟu aṟiyēṉ maṉamum vācakamum
   ceykaiyum yāṉum nī tāṉē (8)
   3570. You, the great cowherd married Nappinnai.
   I have done bad karma
   but you attracted me with your excellent nature.
   You fought with the strong-handed Asurans
   and you were Yama for them.
   You raised the heroic eagle flag.
   You sleep on the thousand-headed snake Adishesha.
   You are the god of the milky ocean.
   I do not know how to worship you.
   My mind, words, deeds and I myself—all are you.
   3571 yāṉum nī tāṉē āvatō meyyē
   aru naraku avaiyum nī āṉāl
   vāṉ uyar iṉpam eytil eṉ? maṟṟai
   narakamē eytil eṉ? eṉiṉum
   yāṉum nī tāṉāyt teḷitoṟum naṉṟum
   añcuvaṉ narakam nāṉ aṭaital
   vāṉ uyar iṉpam maṉṉi vīṟṟiruntāy!
   aruḷu niṉ tāḷkaḷai eṉakkē (9)
   3571. I am indeed you.
   It is true that whatever there is in the world is yours.
   If you are yourself evil hell
   then whether I reach the pleasures of heaven
   or go to hell, what difference does it make?
   Even though I know I am you,
   I am still afraid of going to hell.
   You stay forever in the heaven that gives joy.
   Give me the grace of reaching your feet.
   3572 tāḷkaḷai eṉakkē talaittalaic ciṟappat
   tanta pēr utavik kaimmāṟāt
   tōḷkaḷai ārat taḻuvi eṉ uyirai
   aṟa vilai ceytaṉaṉ cōtī
   tōḷkaḷ āyirattāy muṭikaḷ āyirattāy
   tuṇaimalark kaṇkaḷ āyirattāy
   tāḷkaḷ āyirattāy pērkaḷ āyirattāy
   tamiyaṉēṉ periya appaṉē (10)
   3572. You gave me your feet—
   that is a wonderful thing you did for me.
   O shining light!
   I embrace your arms and give my you life in return.
   You have a thousand arms, a thousand heads,
   a thousand beautiful lotus eyes,
   a thousand feet and a thousand names.
   I am alone. You are my dear father.
   3573 periya appaṉai piramaṉ appaṉai
   uruttiraṉ appaṉai muṉivarkku
   uriya appaṉai amarar appaṉai
   ulakukku ōr taṉi appaṉ taṉṉai
   periya vaṇ kurukūr vaṇ caṭakōpaṉ
   pēṇiṉa āyirattuḷḷum
   uriya col mālai ivaiyum pattu ivaṟṟāl
   uyyalām toṇṭīr! naṅkaṭkē (11)
   3573. Saḍagopan of rich Thirukuruhur
   composed a thousand beautiful pasurams
   on our father, the god of Brahma, of Shiva,
   of the sages and of the gods in the sky.
   He is the only god for this world.
   O devotees, learn and recite the ten pasurams
   on the god and you will be saved.
   -----------
   tiruvāymoḻi eṭṭām pattu (iraṇṭām tirumoḻi, 3574-3584)
   talaivaṉai nōkkic cellak karutiya talaivi kūṟṟu
   3574 naṅkaḷ varivaḷai āyaṅkāḷō
   nammuṭai ētalar muṉpu nāṇi
   nuṅkaṭku yāṉ oṉṟu uraikkum māṟṟam
   nōkkukiṉṟēṉ eṅkum kāṇamāṭṭēṉ
   caṅkam carintaṉa cāy iḻantēṉ
   taṭa mulai poṉ niṟamāyt taḷarntēṉ
   veṅkaṇ paṟavaiyiṉ pākaṉ eṅkōṉ
   vēṅkaṭavāṇaṉai vēṇṭic ceṉṟē (1)
   3574. She says, "O my friends,
   you are decorated with round bangles.
   I am afraid of talking about my love for him to strangers.
   I am searching for him but have not seen him.
   I want to tell you something.
   My conch bangles have become lose.
   My body has grown pale.
   My round breasts have lost their golden color.
   The lord of Thiruvenkaṭam rides on a sharp-eyed eagle
   and I am searching for him."
   3575 vēṇṭic ceṉṟu oṉṟu peṟukiṟpāril
   eṉṉuṭait tōḻiyar nuṅkaṭkēlum
   īṇṭu itu uraikkum paṭiyai antō
   kāṇkiṉṟilēṉ iṭarāṭṭiyēṉ nāṉ
   kāṇ taku tāmaraik kaṇṇaṉ kaḷvaṉ
   viṇṇavar kōṉ naṅkaḷ kōṉaik kaṇṭāl
   īṇṭiya caṅkum niṟaivum koḷvāṉ
   ettaṉai kālam iḷaikkiṉṟēṉē (2)
   3575. She says, "O my friends,
   I cannot describe my sorrow even to my dear friends.
   I have not seen him and I am suffering.
   The handsome lotus-eyed Kaṇṇan is a thief.
   He is the lord of the gods in the sky.
   If I see him he will make my bangles loose
   and take away the lovely color of my body.
   How long can I suffer like this?"
   3576 kālam iḷaikkil allāl viṉaiyēṉ
   nāṉ iḷaikkiṉṟilaṉ kaṇṭukoḷmiṉ
   ñālam aṟiyap paḻi cumantēṉ
   nal nutalīr iṉi nāṇit tāṉ eṉ
   nīla malar neṭum cōti cūḻnta
   nīṇṭa mukil vaṇṇaṉ kaṇṇaṉ koṇṭa
   kōla vaḷaiyoṭum māmai koḷvāṉ
   ettaṉai kālamum kūṭac ceṉṟē? (3)
   3576. She says,
   "O my friends! You have lovely foreheads!
   Though time is passing,
   I have not grown tired of my love for him.
   See, the whole world blames me.
   What is the use of my being shy now?
   He has the color of a dark cloud.
   He is beautiful like a blue flower
   and is surrounded by shining light.
   He took away my lovely bangles
   and the dark color of my body.
   How long I will suffer like this to see him?"
   3577 kūṭac ceṉṟēṉ iṉi eṉ koṭukkēṉ?
   kōlvaḷai neñcat toṭakkam ellām
   pāṭu aṟṟu oḻiya iḻantu vaikal
   palvaḷaiyārmuṉ paricu aḻintēṉ
   māṭak koṭi matiḷ teṉ kuḷantai
   vaṇ kuṭapāl niṉṟa māyak kūttaṉ
   āṭal paṟavai uyartta vel pōr
   āḻivalavaṉai ātarittē (4)
   3577. She says,
   "I lost my round bangles and my heart to him
   and I am ashamed before my friends every day.
   The god Maayan dances on a pot.
   He is the god of flourishing southern Kuḍandai
   surrounded by walls and porches where flags fly.
   He carries a discus, the Garuḍa flag and conquers in war.
   He is strong and I love him and want to go to his place."
   3578 āḻivalavaṉai ātarippum
   āṅku avaṉ nammil varavum ellām
   tōḻiyarkāḷ nam uṭaiyamētāṉ?
   colluvatō iṅku ariyatutāṉ
   ūḻitōṟu ūḻi oruvaṉāka
   naṉku uṇarvārkkum uṇaralākāc
   cūḻal uṭaiya cuṭar koḷ ātit
   tollai am cōti niṉaikkuṅkālē? (5)
   3578. She says,
   "O friends, he carries a discus
   and we have the freedom to love him
   and ask him to come here.
   Yes it is easy to say this but hard to make it happen.
   He is the only god of all the eons.
   Even those who understand everything
   cannot understand him.
   He is the ancient shining god,
   and he plays music on his flute sweetly."
   3579 tollai am cōti niṉaikkuṅkāl eṉ
   col aḷavu aṉṟu imaiyōr tamakkum
   ellai ilātaṉa kūḻppuc ceyyum
   at tiṟam niṟka em māmai koṇṭāṉ
   alli malart taṇ tuḻāyum tārāṉ
   ārkku iṭukō iṉip pūcal? collīr!
   valli vaḷa vayal cūḻ kuṭantai
   mā malarkkaṇ vaḷarkiṉṟa mālē (6)
   3579. She says,
   "There are no words to describe
   the beauty and luster of the ancient god.
   Even the gods cannot understand his might—
   they grow confused when they think of his greatness.
   He took away my dark color.
   He does not give me his fresh lotus garland.
   Tell me, to whom can I tell his naughty play?
   He, the Maal, has lovely lotus eyes
   and sleeps on the ocean in Kuḍandai
   surrounded by flourishing fields and valli creepers."
   3580 māl ari kēcavaṉ nāraṇaṉ cīmātavaṉ
   kōvintaṉ vaikuntaṉ eṉṟu eṉṟu
   ōlam iṭa eṉṉaip paṇṇi viṭṭiṭṭu
   oṉṟum uruvum cuvaṭum kāṭṭāṉ
   ēla malarkkuḻal aṉṉaimīrkāḷ
   eṉṉuṭait tōḻiyarkāḷ eṉ ceykēṉ?
   kālam pala ceṉṟum kāṇpatu āṇai
   uṅkaḷōṭu eṅkaḷ iṭai illaiyē (7)
   3580. She says,
   "He makes me prattle and say,
   ‘You are Maal, Hari, Kesavan, Naaraṇan, Shri,
   Madhavan, Govindan, Vaikundan.’
   He makes me crazy and does not show his form
   or even his footprints to me.
   O mothers, friends with hair decorated with fragrant flowers,
   I promise that I will see him even if it takes many ages.
   I am not going to be friendly with you all
   because you don’t want me to wait to see him."
   3581 iṭai illai yāṉ vaḷartta kiḷikāḷ
   pūvaikaḷkāḷ kuyilkāḷ mayilkāḷ!
   uṭaiya nam māmaiyum caṅkum neñcum
   oṉṟum oḻiya oṭṭātu koṇṭāṉ
   aṭaiyum vaikuntamum pāṟkaṭalum
   añcaṉa veṟpum avai naṇiya
   kaṭaiyaṟap pācaṅkaḷ viṭṭapiṉṉai
   aṉṟi avaṉ avai kāṇkoṭāṉē (8)
   3581. She says, "O parrots, I raised you!
   puvai birds! cuckoo bird! peacocks!
   He took away my dark color, conch bangles,
   my heart, all without leaving me anything.
   Vaikuṇṭam, the milky ocean, and dark Venkaṭa hill are all near,
   but we will not be able to approach those places
   where he stays and see him until all our desires leave us."
   3582 kāṇkoṭuppāṉ allaṉ ārkkum taṉṉai
   kaicey appālatu ōr māyam taṉṉāl
   māṇ kuṟaḷ kōla vaṭivu kāṭṭi
   maṇṇum viṇṇum niṟaiya malarnta
   cēṇ cuṭart tōḷkaḷ pala taḻaitta
   tēva pirāṟku eṉ niṟaiviṉōṭu
   nāṇ koṭuttēṉ iṉi eṉ koṭukkēṉ
   eṉṉuṭai nal nutal naṅkaimīrkāḷ? (9)
   3582. She says,
   "O friends, you have beautiful foreheads!
   He doesn’t show his form even to his wise devotees.
   He took the form of a dwarf with his magic
   and went to Mahabali, received a boon from him
   and measured the flourishing earth and the sky with his feet.
   He shines with many arms.
   He is the god of the gods and I lost my modesty to him.
   What else have I to lose?"
   3583 eṉṉuṭai nal nutal naṅkaimīrkāḷ
   yāṉ iṉic ceyvatu eṉ eṉ neñcu eṉṉai
   niṉ iṭaiyēṉ allēṉ eṉṟu nīṅki
   nēmiyum caṅkum irukaik koṇṭu
   pal neṭum cūḻ cuṭar ñāyiṟṟōṭu
   pāl mati ēnti ōr kōla nīla
   nal neṭum kuṉṟam varuvatu oppāṉ
   nāḷ malarp pātam aṭaintatuvē (10)
   3583. She says,
   "O my friends, you have lovely foreheads.
   What can I do? He carries a discus and a conch in his hands
   and comes like a tall beautiful dark hill
   on which a bright sun shines as a white milky moon rises.
   My heart said, ‘I don’t belong to you,’
   left me and reached the fresh lotus feet of the god."
   3584 pātam aṭaivataṉ pācattālē
   maṟṟavaṉ pācaṅkaḷ muṟṟa viṭṭu
   kōtu il pukaḻk kaṇṇaṉ taṉ aṭimēl
   vaṇ kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ coṉṉa
   tītu il antāti ōr āyirattuḷ
   ivaiyum ōr pattu icaiyoṭum vallār
   ātum ōr tītu ilar āki iṅkum
   aṅkum ellām amaivārkaḷ tāmē. (11)
   3584. Saḍagopan of flourishing Thirukuruhur
   who removed all other desires and gave his devotion
   only to the feet of famous Kaṇṇan
   composed a thousand pasurams in faultless andaadi metre
   praising the divine feet of Kaṇṇan.
   If devotees learn these ten pasurams
   and recite them with music
   they will have no trouble in this world
   and reach the highest heaven.
   ----------
   tiruvāymoḻi eṭṭām pattu (mūṉṟām tirumoḻi, 3585-3595)
   emperumāṉukku eṅkum aṉpuṭaiyār uḷar eṉpatai
   aruḷāl uṇarntu āḻvār accam tīrtal
   3585 aṅkum iṅkum vāṉavar tāṉavar yāvarum
   eṅkum iṉaiyai eṉṟu uṉṉai aṟiyakilātu alaṟṟi
   aṅkam cērum pūmakaḷ maṇmakaḷ āymakaḷ
   caṅku cakkarak kaiyavaṉ eṉpar caraṇamē (1)
   3585. The gods in the sky and the Asurans
   have all joined together here, there and everywhere
   without knowing who you are,
   wandering and longing to see you.
   They say, "He embraces the earth goddess,
   Lakshmi on a lotus,
   and Nappinnai the daughter of a cowherd.
   He carries a conch and a discus and he is our refuge."
   3586 caraṇam ākiya nāṉmaṟai nūlkaḷum cārātē
   maraṇam tōṟṟam vāṉpiṇi mūppu eṉṟu ivai māyttōm
   karaṇap pal paṭai paṟṟu aṟa ōṭum kaṉal āḻi
   araṇat tiṇ paṭai ēntiya īcaṟku āḷāyē (2)
   3586. We will not depend
   on what we have learned in the Vedas and sastras
   that everyone believes is a refuge.
   We destroyed birth, terrible sicknesses,
   and old age by becoming the devotee of the lord
   who carries a fiery discus
   that destroys all his enemies and protects dharma.
   3587 āḷum āḷār āḻiyum caṅkum cumappār tām
   vāḷum villum koṇṭu piṉ celvār maṟṟu illai
   tāḷum tōḷum kaikaḷai ārat toḻak kāṇēṉ
   nāḷum nāḷum nāṭuvaṉ aṭiyēṉ ñālattē (3)
   3587. He is the king of the world and rules all.
   He carries a conch and a discus,
   and no one needs to follow him carrying a sword and a bow
   because he himself carries them.
   I want to worship his feet and arms
   but I have not seen him.
   I am his slave and day after day
   I search for him all over the earth,
   but I do not seen him.
   3588 ñālam pōṉakam paṟṟi ōr muṟṟā uru āki
   ālam pēr ilai aṉṉavacam ceyyum ammāṉē
   kālam pērvatu ōr kār iruḷ ūḻi ottu uḷatāl uṉ
   kōlam kār eḻil kāṇaluṟṟu āḻum koṭiyēṟkē (4)
   3588. You are my father.
   You rule the whole world and are blissful.
   You sleep as a baby on a banyan leaf.
   For women who have vine-like waists
   and love your beautiful dark form,
   time seems like a darkness that spreads for an eon.
   3589 koṭiyār māṭak kōḷūr akattum puḷiyaṅkuṭiyum
   maṭiyātu iṉṉē nī tuyil mēvi makiḻntatu tāṉ
   aṭiyār allal tavirtta acaivō? aṉṟēl ip
   paṭi tāṉ nīṇṭu tāviya acaivō? paṇiyāyē (5)
   3589. You stay and sleep happily always
   in Puliyanguḍi and Koḷur
   filled with palaces where beautiful vines grow.
   Are you sleeping because you have grown weary
   taking away the trouble of your devotees?
   Or are you tired because you grew tall
   and measured the earth and the sky?
   Tell us.
   3590 paṇiyā amarar paṇivum paṇpum tāmē ām
   aṇi ār āḻiyum caṅkamum ēntum avar kāṇmiṉ
   taṇiyā vem nōy ulakil tavirppāṉ tirunīla
   maṇi ār mēṉiyōṭu eṉ maṉam cūḻa varuvārē (6)
   3590. If the gods in the sky do not obey him
   he makes them obey and be good.
   See, he carries a beautiful discus and a conch
   and cures the sicknesses of his devotees that can’t be cured.
   He entered my heart with his divine dark diamond-like body
   and stays with me.
   3591 varuvār celvār vaṇparicārattu irunta eṉ
   tiruvāḻ mārvaṟku eṉ tiṟam collār ceyvatu eṉ
   uru ār cakkaram caṅku cumantu iṅku ummōṭu
   orupāṭu uḻalvāṉ ōr aṭiyāṉum uḷaṉ eṉṟē? (7)
   3591. I see many of my friends come and go,
   but they do not go and tell my love
   to him on whose chest beautiful Lakshmi stays.
   What can I do?
   He carries a beautiful discus and a conch.
   Tell him, " There is a devotee of you.
   She suffers with love for you
   and she wants to join you."
   3592 eṉṟē eṉṉai uṉ ēr ār kōlat tiruntu aṭikkīḻ
   niṉṟē āṭceyya nī koṇṭaruḷa niṉaippatutāṉ?
   kuṉṟu ēḻ pār ēḻ cūḻ kaṭal ñālam muḻu ēḻum
   niṉṟē tāviya nīḷ kaḻal āḻit tirumālē (8)
   3592. O Thirumal, you carry a discus
   and you measured all the seven worlds
   surrounded by seven oceans and seven mountains
   with your ankleted feet.
   Give me your grace and make me join your beautiful feet.
   3593 tirumāl nāṉmukaṉ ceñcaṭaiyāṉ eṉṟu ivarkaḷ em
   perumāṉ taṉmaiyai yār aṟikiṟpār? pēci eṉ?
   oru mā mutalvā ūḻip pirāṉ eṉṉai āḷuṭaik
   karu mā mēṉiyaṉ eṉpaṉ eṉ kātal kalakkavē (9)
   3593. Even Vishnu, Nanmuhan
   and Shiva who has red jata
   do not know the nature of our lord.
   Who else could know his nature?
   What is the use of my talking about this?
   I say, "He is the great ancient god.
   He is the lord of the eon.
   He has a dark body and he rules me."
   My love makes me suffer.
   3594 kalakkam illā nal tava muṉivar karai kaṇṭōr
   tuḷakkam illā vāṉavar ellām toḻuvārkaḷ
   malakkam eyta mā kaṭal taṉṉaik kaṭaintāṉai
   ulakka nām pukaḻkiṟpatu eṉ ceyvatu? uraiyīrē? (10)
   3594. The sages who do good tapas
   do not have any confusion.
   Many scholars learn the sastras well.
   The gods in the sky never tremble.
   All these sages, scholars and gods worship our god.
   He churned the large ocean to get nectar from it.
   How can we, so fascinated with him, praise him?
   What can we do? Tell me.
   3595 uraiyā vem nōy tavira aruḷ nīḷ muṭiyāṉai
   varai ār māṭam maṉṉu kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ
   urai ēy coltoṭai ōr āyirattuḷ ip pattum
   niraiyē vallār nīṭu ulakattup piṟavārē (11)
   3595. Saḍagopan of famous Thirukuruhur
   surrounded with palaces as high as hills
   composed pasurams with meter and good meanings
   and praised the god adorned with a tall crown
   who removes the terrible sicknesses of people.
   If devotees learn well and recite these pasurams
   they will not be born in this wide world.
   -----------
   tiruvāymoḻi eṭṭām pattu (nāṉkām tirumoḻi, 3596-3606)
   em perumāṉatu valimai avaṉ aṉpuṭaiyāruṭaṉ amarntirukkum
   cērtti mutaliyavaṟṟait tirucceṅkuṉṟūril kaṇṭu makiḻtal (tirucceṅkuṉṟūr)
   3596 vār kaṭā aruvi yāṉai mā malaiyiṉ
   maruppu iṇaik kuvaṭu iṟuttu uruṭṭi
   ūr koḷ tiṇ pākaṉ uyir cekuttu araṅkiṉ
   mallaraik koṉṟu cūḻ paraṇmēl
   pōr kaṭā aracar puṟakkiṭa māṭam
   mīmicaik kañcaṉait takartta
   cīr koḷ ciṟṟāyaṉ tirucceṅkuṉṟūril
   tirucciṟṟāṟu eṅkaḷ celcārvē (1)
   3596. The elephant Kuvalayabeedam, large as a mountain,
   shed ichor like a waterfalls. He fought it, making it roll over,
   broke its tusks and killed its strong mahout.
   He killed the wrestlers on a stage
   and Kamsan on the porch of a palace.
   He fought with many kings and defeated them.
   He is the lovely small child of cowherds.
   He is our beloved god, our refuge
   and stays in Thiruchengundrur where the Thiruchitraru flows
   3597 eṅkaḷ celcārvu yāmuṭai amutam
   imaiyavar appaṉ eṉ appaṉ
   poṅku mūvulakum paṭaittu aḷittu aḻikkum
   poruntu mūvuruvaṉ em aruvaṉ
   ceṅkayal ukaḷum tēm paṇai puṭai cūḻ
   tirucceṅkuṉṟūrt tirucciṟṟāṟu
   aṅku amarkiṉṟa ātiyāṉ allāl
   yāvar maṟṟu eṉ amar tuṇaiyē? (2)
   3597. He is the father of the gods and of us.
   He is as sweet as nectar and he is our refuge.
   He creates all the three worlds, protects them and destroys them.
   He has all these three forms and he is formless.
   I have no other companion except the ancient god
   of Thiruchengundrur on the bank of the Thiruchitraru
   where lovely kayal fish frolic in the flourishing fields.
   3598 eṉ amar perumāṉ imaiyavar perumāṉ
   iru nilam iṭanta em perumāṉ
   muṉṉai val viṉaikaḷ muḻutu uṭaṉ māḷa
   eṉṉai āḷkiṉṟa em perumāṉ
   teṉ ticaikku aṇi koḷ tirucceṅkuṉṟūril
   tirucciṟṟāṟṟaṅkarai mīpāl
   niṉṟa em perumāṉ aṭi allāl caraṇ
   niṉaippilum piṟitu illai eṉakkē (3)
   3598. He is my divine lord.
   He is the god of the gods in the sky.
   He took the form of a boar and split open the large world.
   He rules me and he destroyed all my bad karma.
   I cannot think of any refuge
   except the two feet of my dear god of Thiruchengundrur
   on the bank of Thiruchitraru that ornaments the southern land.
   3599 piṟitu illai eṉakku periya mūvulakum
   niṟaiyap pēr uruvamāy nimirnta
   kuṟiya māṇ emmāṉ kurai kaṭal kaṭainta
   kōla māṇikkam eṉ ammāṉ
   ceṟi kulai vāḻai kamuku teṅku aṇi cūḻ
   tirucceṅkuṉṟūrt tirucciṟṟāṟu
   aṟiya meymmaiyē niṉṟa em perumāṉ
   aṭiiṇai allatu ōr araṇē (4)
   3599. I don’t want even the three great worlds.
   He is the lord whose dwarf form grew tall,
   and he measured the world and the sky with his feet
   at Mahabali’s sacrifice.
   My father, the beautiful jewel, churned the roaring milky ocean.
   I have no protection except the two feet of the dear god
   of Thiruchengundrur surrounded by trees
   with many ripening bananas, kamugu trees and sweet coconut trees
   where the Thiruchitraru flows.
   3600 allatu ōr araṇum avaṉil vēṟu illai
   atu poruḷ ākilum avaṉai
   allatu eṉ āvi amarntu aṇaikillātu
   ātalāl avaṉ uṟaikiṉṟa
   nalla nāṉmaṟaiyōr vēḷviyuḷ maṭutta
   naṟum pukai vicumpu oḷi maṟaikkum
   nalla nīḷ māṭat tirucceṅkuṉṟūril
   tirucciṟṟāṟu eṉakku nal araṇē (5)
   3600. There is no protection for me except him.
   Whatever it is I cannot survive without him.
   My good protection is the bank of Thiruchiṛṛaaṛu river
   in Thiruchenkunṛur filled with tall palaces
   where Brahmins make sacrifices and recite the four Vedas
   and the smoke from them darkens the sky.
   3601 eṉakku nal araṇai eṉatu ār uyirai
   imaiyavar tantai tāy taṉṉai
   taṉakkum taṉ taṉmai aṟivu ariyāṉai
   taṭam kaṭal paḷḷi ammāṉai
   maṉakkoḷ cīr mūvāyiravar vaṇ civaṉum
   ayaṉum tāṉum oppār vāḻ
   kaṉakkoḷ tiṇ māṭat tirucceṅkuṉṟūril
   tirucciṟṟāṟu ataṉuḷ kaṇṭēṉē (6)
   3601 He is my excellent protection.
   He is my dear life.
   He is the father and mother of the gods.
   It is hard for anyone to know
   and understand his wonderful nature.
   He is our father and he sleeps on the wide milky ocean.
   I saw him in Thiruchitraaṛu in Thiruchenkundrur
   filled with lovely palaces
   where three thousand famous Brahmins, generous Shiva,
   Brahma and other devotees live.
   3602 tirucceṅkuṉṟūril tirucciṟṟāṟu ataṉuḷ
   kaṇṭa at tiruvaṭi eṉṟum
   tiruc ceyya kamalak kaṇṇum cevvāyum
   cevvaṭiyum ceyya kaiyum
   tiruc ceyya kamala untiyum ceyya
   kamalai mārpum ceyya uṭaiyum
   tiruc ceyya muṭiyum āramum paṭaiyum
   tikaḻa eṉ cintaiyuḷāṉē (7)
   3602. He has divine lotus eyes,
   a beautiful mouth, lovely hands,
   a navel where Brahma stays on a lotus,
   lovely lotus eyes, beautiful garments,
   a precious crown, ornaments and heroic weapons.
   The famous god of Thiruchenkunṛur
   on the bank of Thiruchitraaṛu
   stays in my heart and shines.
   3603 tikaḻa eṉ cintaiyuḷ iruntāṉai
   ceḻu nilattēvar nāṉmaṟaiyōr
   ticai kaikūppi ēttum tirucceṅkuṉṟūril
   tirucciṟṟāṟṟaṅ karaiyāṉai
   pukar koḷ vāṉavarkaḷ pukaliṭam taṉṉai
   acurar vaṉ kaiyar vem kūṟṟai
   pukaḻumāṟu aṟiyēṉ poruntu mūvulakum
   paṭaippoṭu keṭuppuk kāppavaṉē (8)
   3603. He shines in my heart.
   He is the god of Thiruchengunḍur
   on the bank of Thiruchiṛṛaaṛu
   where the farmers who own flourishing paddy lands,
   and the Brahmins who recite all the four Vedas
   worship the god in all directions, folding their hands.
   He is the refuge for all the gods in the sky and they praise him.
   He fights with the heroic Asurans like a Yama.
   He created all the three worlds
   and protects them from destruction.
   I do not know how to praise him.
   3604 paṭaippoṭu keṭuppuk kāppavaṉ pirama
   paramparaṉ civappirāṉ avaṉē
   iṭaippukku ōr uruvum oḻivu illai avaṉē
   pukaḻvu illai yāvaiyum tāṉē
   koṭaip perum pukaḻār iṉaiyar taṉ āṉār
   kūriya viccaiyōṭu oḻukkam
   naṭaip pali iyaṟkait tirucceṅkuṉṟūril
   tirucciṟṟāṟu amarnta nātaṉē (9)
   3604. He creates all the gods
   and the creatures of the world, keeping them from trouble.
   He himself is the highest god, and he is Brahma and Shiva.
   He has no form or end.
   No one else is fit to be praised—he receives all fame.
   He, with his beautiful nature, is the generous and famous god
   of Thiruchitraaṛu of Thiruchengundrur
   where the people are principled and clever and perform sacrifices.
   3605 amarnta nātaṉai avar avar āki
   avarkku aruḷ aruḷum ammāṉai
   amarnta taṇ paḻaṉat tirucceṅkuṉṟūril
   tirucciṟṟāṟṟaṅ karaiyāṉai
   amarnta cīr mūvāyiravar vētiyarkaḷ
   tampati avaṉitēvar vāḻvu
   amarnta māyōṉai mukkaṇ ammāṉai
   nāṉmukaṉai amarntēṉē (10)
   3605. The lord our father gives his grace to all creatures
   and he himself is in all of them.
   He is the god of Thiruchengundrur on the banks
   of Thiruchitraru flourishing with cool fields.
   Our god Maayon is the lord of Nanmuhan, the three-eyed Shiva,
   the three thousand Brahmins and the god of the gods.
   The whole world venerates him and I worship him with love.
   3606 tēṉai naṉ pālai kaṉṉalai amutai
   tiruntu ulaku uṇṭa ammāṉai
   vāṉa nāṉmukaṉai malarnta taṇ koppūḻ
   malarmicaip paṭaitta māyōṉai
   kōṉai vaṇ kurukūr vaṇ caṭakōpaṉ
   coṉṉa āyirattuḷ ip pattum
   vāṉiṉ mītu ēṟṟi aruḷceytu muṭikkum
   piṟavi mā māyak kūttiṉaiyē (11)
   3606. Saḍagopan of rich Thirukuruhur composed
   a thousand poems on the god of gods,
   who is honey, sweet milk, sugarcane juice,
   and our father who swallowed the whole world.
   Our god the Maayon created the divine god Nanmuhan
   on a beautiful lotus on his navel.
   If devotees learn and recite these ten pasurams
   they will go to moksha and receive the grace of the lord
   and their illusory births will go away.
   -------------
   tiruvāymoḻi eṭṭām pattu (aintām tirumoḻi, 3607-3617)
   emperumāṉatu vaṭivaḻakaik kāṇappeṟāta āḻvār
   ācai mikuntu aḻutu araṟṟutal
   3607 māyak kūttā vāmaṉā
   viṉaiyēṉ kaṇṇā kaṇ kai kāl
   tūya ceyya malarkaḷā
   cōtic cevvāy mukiḻatā
   cāyal cāmat tirumēṉi
   taṇ pācaṭaiyā tāmarai nīḷ
   vācat taṭampōl varuvāṉē
   orunāḷ kāṇa vārāyē (1)
   3607. You are a magical dancer.
   You are a dwarf.
   I have done much karma.
   O Kaṇṇan, your eyes, hands and legs
   are like pure red lotus flowers.
   Your red shining mouth is like an opening lotus bud.
   Your divine body is like a cool green leaf.
   You come as if you were a fragrant lotus pond.
   Come to me one day—I long to see you.
   3608 kāṇa vārāy eṉṟu eṉṟu
   kaṇṇum vāyum tuvarntu aṭiyēṉ
   nāṇi nal nāṭṭu alamantāl
   iraṅki orunāḷ nī antō
   kāṇa vārāy! karu nāyiṟu
   utikkum karu mā māṇikka
   nāḷ nal malaipōl cuṭarc cōti
   muṭi cēr ceṉṉi ammāṉē! (2)
   3608. I call you saying, "Come, I want to see you!"
   and my eyes are tired and my mouth dry.
   I am ashamed calling and calling you—
   I suffer to see you.
   Won’t you feel sorry for me and come to see me?
   Come to me shining like a large dark diamond mountain
   behind which a dark sun rises at dawn.
   O father, on your dark hair you wear a shining crown.
   3609 muṭicēr ceṉṉi ammā niṉ
   moy pūm tāmat taṇ tuḻāyk
   kaṭicēr kaṇṇip perumāṉē
   eṉṟu eṉṟu ēṅki aḻutakkāl
   paṭicēr makarak kuḻaikaḷum
   pavaḷa vāyum nāl tōḷum
   tuṭi cēr iṭaiyum amaintatu ōr
   tū nīr mukil pōl tōṉṟāyē. (3)
   3609. O father, you wear a divine crown on your head.
   If I long for you, cry and say,
   "You are adorned with a cool thulasi garland
   mixed with fragrant flowers that swarm with bees,"
   you will appear before me like a cloud filled with pure water,
   with four arms, a coral mouth, emerald earrings
   and a waist thin as a tudi drum.
   3610 tū nīr mukil pōl tōṉṟum niṉ
   cuṭar koḷ vaṭivum kaṉivāyum
   tē nīrk kamalak kaṇkaḷum
   vantu eṉ cintai niṟaintavā
   mā nīr veḷḷi malaitaṉmēl
   vaṇ kār nīla mukil pōla
   tū nīrk kaṭaluḷ tuyilvāṉē
   entāy! collamāṭṭēṉē (4)
   3610. Your shining form that looks
   like a cloud filled with pure water,
   your mouth sweet as a fruit,
   your lotus eyes sweet as honey,
   all came and entered my thoughts.
   As you sleep on the ocean abundant with pure water
   you are like a dark cloud in the flourishing rainy season
   floating above a silver mountain.
   O my father, I cannot describe your beauty.
   3611 colla māṭṭēṉ aṭiyēṉ uṉ
   tuḷaṅku cōtit tiruppātam
   ellai il cīr iḷa nāyiṟu
   iraṇṭupōl eṉ uḷḷavā
   allal eṉṉum iruḷ cērtaṟku
   upāyam eṉṉē āḻi cūḻ
   mallai ñālam muḻutu uṇṭa
   mā nīrk koṇṭal vaṇṇaṉē? (5)
   3611. Your divine shining feet entered my mind
   like two morning suns of matchless beauty.
   I am your slave and cannot describe your loveliness.
   You have the color of a cloud filled with good water
   and swallow all the flourishing world surrounded by oceans.
   Why do we suffer with troubles
   that come as darkness in our lives?
   Tell us why, or tell us how to remove the sufferings of life.
   3612 koṇṭal vaṇṇā kuṭakkūttā
   viṉaiyēṉ kaṇṇā kaṇṇā eṉ
   aṇṭa vāṇā eṉṟu eṉṉai
   āḷak kūppiṭṭu aḻaittakkāl
   viṇ taṉmēl tāṉ maṇmēl tāṉ
   viri nīrk kaṭal tāṉ maṟṟuttāṉ
   toṇṭaṉēṉ uṉ kaḻalkāṇa
   orunāḷ vantu tōṉṟāyē (6)
   3612. I want you to rule me and I call and praise you saying,
   "You have the color of a cloud. You danced on a pot.
   I have done bad karma. O Kaṇṇan, you are my Kaṇṇan.
   You are the god of the sky."
   Won’t you come to me from heaven
   or from the earth or from the ocean with its abundant water
   or from any other place? Appear in front of me one day
   so that I, your devotee can see your ankleted feet.
   3613 vantu tōṉṟāy aṉṟēl uṉ
   vaiyam tāya malar aṭikkīḻ
   munti vantu yāṉ niṟpa
   mukappē kūvip paṇikkoḷḷāy
   centaṇ kamalak kaṇ kai kāl
   civanta vāy ōr karu nāyiṟu
   antam illāk katir parappi
   alarntatu okkum ammāṉē (7)
   3613. Come to me.
   If you don’t, I will come to your door
   and stay under your lotus feet that measured the world.
   If I do that you will call me and make me serve you.
   You are my father and you are like a dark sun
   with beautiful cool lotus eyes, a red mouth, hands and legs
   shining as it rises and spreads its endless rays.
   3614 okkum ammāṉ uruvam eṉṟu
   uḷḷam kuḻaintu nāḷ nāḷum
   tokka mēkap pal kuḻāṅkaḷ
   kāṇumtōṟum tolaivaṉ nāṉ
   takka aivar tamakkāy aṉṟu
   īr aimpatiṉmar tāḷ cāyap
   pukka naltērt taṉippākā
   vārāy ituvō poruttamē? (8)
   3614. Every day whenever I see a mass of clouds
   my heart melts and I think,
   "This looks like the form of my father,"
   and I lose myself.
   You drove the good chariot for the five Pandavas
   and destroyed the hundred Kauravas,
   but you have not come to me.
   Is this right?
   3615 ituvō poruttam? miṉ āḻip
   paṭaiyāy ēṟum irum ciṟaippuḷ
   atuvē koṭiyā uyarttāṉē
   eṉṟu eṉṟu ēṅki aḻutakkāl
   etuvēyākak karutuṅkol
   im mā ñālam poṟai tīrppāṉ
   matu vār cōlai uttara
   maturaip piṟanta māyaṉē? (9)
   3615. "Is this right?
   You carry a shining discus and a Garuda flag
   and you ride on an eagle with huge wings."
   If I say this and long for you and cry what will you do?
   You are the Maayan and were born in northern Madhura
   surrounded by groves dripping with honey.
   You came to this earth to take away the suffering of its people.
   3616 piṟanta māyā pāratam
   poruta māyā nī iṉṉē
   ciṟanta kāl tī nīr vāṉ maṇ
   piṟavum āya perumāṉē
   kaṟanta pāluḷ neyyē pōl
   ivaṟṟuḷ eṅkum kaṇṭukoḷ
   iṟantu niṉṟa peru māyā
   uṉṉai eṅkē kāṇkēṉē? (10)
   3616. O Maayan, you were born on this earth.
   You, the Maayan, fought the Bharatha war.
   You, the lord, are the wonderful wind, fire, water, sky, earth
   and all other things in the world.
   You are the great Maayan who stays in everything
   but no one can see you because you hide
   like the ghee that is in fresh milk.
   Where can I see you?
   3617 eṅkē kāṇkēṉ īṉ tuḻāy ammāṉ taṉṉai yāṉ? eṉṟu eṉṟu
   aṅkē tāḻnta coṟkaḷāl am taṇ kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ
   ceṅkēḻ coṉṉa āyirattuḷ ivaiyum pattum vallārkaḷ
   iṅkē kāṇa ippiṟappē makiḻvar elliyum kālaiyē. (11)
   3617. Saḍagopan of flourishing cool Thirukuruhur
   composed a thousand pasurams
   with beautiful music and divine words
   in which a devotee asks the god,
   "Where can I see my father who wears a fresh thulasi garland?"
   If devotees learn and recite these ten pasurams
   they will be happy night and day in this birth itself
   because they know the nature of god.
   ------------
   tiruvāymoḻi eṭṭām pattu (āṟām tirumoḻi, 3618-3628)
   āḻvāratu tuṉpattait tīrkkum poruṭṭu tirumāl tirukkaṭittāṉattil
   iruntamai kūṟal (tirukkaṭittāṉam)
   3618 elliyum kālaiyum taṉṉai niṉaintu eḻa
   nalla aruḷkaḷ namakkē tantu aruḷ ceyvāṉ
   alli am taṇ am tuḻāy muṭi appaṉ ūr
   celvarkaḷ vāḻum tirukkaṭittāṉamē (1)
   3618. He will give us his good grace
   so that we will think only of him
   when we get up every day in the morning and at night.
   His hair is decorated with a beautiful thulasi garland
   strung with alli blossoms.
   My father is the god of Thirukaḍithanam
   where good devotees live.
   3619 tirukkaṭittāṉamum eṉṉuṭaiyac cintaiyum
   orukkaṭuttu uḷḷē uṟaiyum pirāṉ kaṇṭīr
   ceruk kaṭuttu aṉṟu tikaitta arakkarai
   uruk keṭa vāḷi poḻinta oruvaṉē (2)
   3619. See, the lord thinks that Thirukaḍithanam
   and my heart are the same
   and he enters my heart and stays there.
   He, the matchless one, fought, shooting arrows like rain
   at the astonished Rakshasa Ravaṇan
   and destroyed him
   so that even his shape could not be seen.
   3620 oruvar iruvar ōr mūvar eṉa niṉṟu
   uruvu karantu uḷḷumtōṟum tittippāṉ
   tiru amar mārvaṉ tirukkaṭittāṉattai
   maruvi uṟaikiṉṟa māyap pirāṉē (3)
   3620. The lord Maayan with beautiful Lakshmi on his chest
   has the forms of the three gods Shiva, Brahma and Indra.
   Formless, he has entered my heart.
   He wishes to stay in Thirukaḍithanam.
   Whenever I think of him he is sweet.
   3621 māyap pirāṉ eṉa valviṉai māyntu aṟa
   nēcattiṉāl neñcam nāṭu kuṭikoṇṭāṉ
   tēcattu amarar tirukkaṭittāṉattai
   vācap poḻil maṉṉu kōyil koṇṭāṉē (4)
   3621. The lord Maayan destroyed all my bad karma
   and abides in my heart with love as if that were his native place.
   He stays in the temple of Thirukaḍithanam
   surrounded by fragrant groves
   where all the gods in the sky come and worship him.
   3622 kōyil koṇṭāṉ taṉ tirukkaṭittāṉattai
   kōyil koṇṭāṉ ataṉōṭum eṉ neñcakam;
   kōyilkoḷ teyvam ellām toḻa vaikuntam
   kōyil koṇṭa kuṭakkūtta ammāṉē (5)
   3622. He, the god in the temple of Thirukaḍithanam,
   stays in my heart, which he has made his temple.
   All the gods from many temples
   come to Thirukadithanam to worship him,
   our father who danced on a pot.
   3623 kūtta ammāṉ koṭiyēṉ iṭar muṟṟavum
   māytta ammāṉ matucūta ammāṉ uṟai
   pūtta poḻil taṇ tirukkaṭittāṉattai
   ētta nillā kuṟikkoḷmiṉ iṭarē (6)
   3623. I have done bad karma,
   and he, Madhusudhanan who danced on a pot,
   is my father and has destroyed all the troubles that afflict me.
   He is the god of flourishing Thirukaḍithanam
   surrounded by blooming groves.
   If you go there and praise him all your troubles will go away.
   Keep this in your mind.
   3624 koḷmiṉ iṭar keṭa uḷḷattu kōvintaṉ
   maṇ viṇ muḻutum aḷanta oṇ tāmarai
   maṇṇavar tām toḻa vāṉavar tām vantu
   naṇṇu tirukkaṭittāṉa nakarē (7)
   3624. The god Govindan who stays in my heart
   measured the whole earth and sky.
   All the people of the earth worship his beautiful lotus feet.
   Go to Thirukaḍithanam where the gods in the sky.
   Worship the god and all your troubles will go away.
   3625 tāṉa nakarkaḷ talaicciṟantu eṅkeṅkum
   vāṉ in nilam kaṭal muṟṟum em māyaṟkē
   āṉaviṭattum eṉ neñcum tirukkaṭit
   tāṉa nakarum taṉa tāyap patiyē (8)
   3625. Our Maayan stays in the sky,
   the earth, the ocean and many other good places
   and they all belong to him,
   but he chose my heart
   and Thirukaḍithanam for his temples .
   3626 tāyap patikaḷ talaicciṟantu eṅkeṅkum
   māyattiṉāl maṉṉi vīṟṟiruntāṉ uṟai
   tēcattu amarar tirukkaṭittāṉattuḷ
   āyarkku atipati aṟputaṉ tāṉē (9)
   3626. There are many marvelous places
   that belong to Maayan where he stays happily forever,
   but that wonderful god, the lord of cowherds,
   chose Thirukadithanam as his temple
   and stays there where the shining gods come and worship him.
   3627 aṟputaṉ nārāyaṇaṉ ari vāmaṉaṉ
   niṟpatu mēvi iruppatu eṉ neñcakam
   nal pukaḻ vētiyar nāṉmaṟai niṉṟu atir
   kaṟpakac cōlait tirukkaṭittāṉamē (10)
   3627. The wonderful god Narayaṇan, Hari, Vamaṇan
   stays in my heart and in Thirukaḍithanam
   surrounded by karpaga groves
   where good and renowned Brahmins loudly recite the Vedas.
   3628 cōlait tirukkaṭittāṉattu uṟai tiru
   mālai matiḷ kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ col
   pālōṭu amutu aṉṉa āyirattu ip pattum
   mēlai vaikuntattu iruttum viyantē (11)
   3628. Saḍagopan of Thirukuruhur
   surrounded by walls
   composed a thousand pasurams
   that are as sweet as nectar and milk mixed together
   praising Thirumaal of Thirukaḍithanam
   surrounded by groves.
   If devotees learn these ten pasurams and recite them
   they will go to Vaikuṇṭam and be happy.
   --------------
   tiruvāymoḻi eṭṭām pattu (ēḻām tirumoḻi, 3629-3639)
   tam uḷḷattil emperumāṉ vīṟṟirunta paṭiyai āḻvār kūṟi makiḻtal
   3629 iruttum viyantu eṉṉait taṉ poṉ aṭikkīḻ eṉṟu
   aruttittu eṉaittu ōr pala nāḷ aḻaittēṟku
   poruttam uṭai vāmaṉaṉ tāṉ pukuntu eṉ taṉ
   karuttai uṟa vīṟṟiruntāṉ kaṇṭu koṇṭē (1)
   3629. I worshipped the lord every day
   and said with amazement,
   "Come and keep me under your golden feet!"
   and the generous god Vamanan saw me
   entered my heart and stayed there.
   He is happy to be with me.
   3630 iruntāṉ kaṇṭukoṇṭu eṉatu ēḻai neñcu āḷum
   tiruntāta ōr aivarait tēyntu aṟa maṉṉi
   perum tāḷ kaḷiṟṟukku aruḷceyta perumāṉ
   tarum tāṉ aruḷ tāṉ iṉi yāṉ aṟiyēṉē (2)
   3630. He has entered my poor heart and destroyed
   the feelings of the five senses that rule it.
   He does not allow me to fall into the desires they cause.
   The grace that my great lord has given me
   is higher than the grace that he gave to Gajendra.
   I do not know how this happened.
   3631 aruḷ tāṉ iṉi yāṉ aṟiyēṉ avaṉ eṉ uḷ
   iruḷ tāṉ aṟa vīṟṟiruntāṉ itu allāl
   poruḷ tāṉ eṉil mūvulakum poruḷ alla
   maruḷ tāṉ ītō? māya mayakku mayakkē? (3)
   3631. I cannot understand
   how he has such love for me
   that he gives me his wonderful grace.
   He stays in my heart and removes all my ignorance.
   He does not think ruling all the three worlds
   is more important than staying in my heart.
   What kind of confusion is this?
   Or is it just that I am confused to be in an illusory world?
   3632 māya mayakku mayakkāṉ eṉṉai vañcittu
   āyaṉ amararkku ariēṟu eṉatu ammāṉ
   tūya cuṭarccōti taṉatu eṉ uḷ vaittāṉ
   tēcam tikaḻum taṉ tiruvaruḷ ceytē (4)
   3632. He is my father.
   He is the lord of cowherds and the gods in the sky.
   He is the man-lion.
   He confused me with his power of illusion.
   He is a faultless shining light.
   He gave his divine grace that is praised in all lands,
   came to me and stayed within me.
   3633 tikaḻum taṉ tiruvaruḷ ceytu ulakattār
   pukaḻum pukaḻ tāṉ atu kāṭṭit tantu eṉ uḷ
   tikaḻum maṇik kuṉṟam oṉṟē ottu niṉṟāṉ
   pukaḻum pukaḻ maṟṟu eṉakkum ōr poruḷē? (5)
   3633. He gave his divine grace to me.
   He gave me all the fame that makes the world praise me.
   He stays like a shining diamond hill.
   All the fame that I get is not important for me,
   only his grace.
   3634 poruḷ maṟṟu eṉakkum ōr poruḷ taṉṉil cīrkkat
   tarumēl piṉṉai yārkku avaṉ taṉṉaik koṭukkum
   karu māṇikkak kuṉṟattut tāmaraipōl
   tiru mārpu kāl kaṇ kai cevvāy untiyāṉē? (6)
   3634. There are so many things that the lord can give me,
   but he gave himself to me.
   How could he give himself to anyone else
   after he has given himself to me?
   On his body that is like dark diamond hill,
   his divine chest, legs, eyes, hands and beautiful mouth and belly
   are all as beautiful as blooming lotuses
   3635 cevvāy unti veṇ pal cuṭark kuḻai tammōṭu
   evvāyc cuṭarum tammil muṉ vaḷāykkoḷḷa
   cevvāy muṟuvalōṭu eṉatu uḷḷattu irunta
   avvāy aṉṟi yāṉ aṟiyēṉ maṟṟu aruḷē (7)
   3635. His beautiful mouth, ears ornamented with shining earrings,
   and white teeth all shine, each competing with the other.
   He stays in my heart smiling with his red mouth.
   I know no grace except the grace of the smile of his mouth.
   3636 aṟiyēṉ maṟṟu aruḷ eṉṉai āḷum pirāṉār
   veṟitē aruḷceyvar ceyvārkaṭku ukantu
   ciṟiyēṉuṭaic cintaiyuḷ mūvulakum taṉ
   neṟiyā vayiṟṟil koṇṭu niṉṟoḻintārē (8)
   3636. The lord rules me
   and if he wants to give his grace to someone,
   he gives it without expecting anything in return.
   I am a small devotee.
   He who swallowed all the three worlds
   and keeps them in his stomach
   has entered my heart and stays there.
   3637 vayiṟṟil koṇṭu niṉṟoḻintārum evarum
   vayiṟṟil koṇṭu niṉṟu oru mūvulakum tam
   vayiṟṟil koṇṭu niṉṟavaṇṇam niṉṟa mālai
   vayiṟṟil koṇṭu maṉṉa vaittēṉ matiyālē (9)
   3637. The three worlds protected by kings
   were all destroyed at the end of the eon.
   The lord Maal swallowed them all,
   keeping them in his stomach and protecting them.
   With my cleverness,
   I made that Maal come to me and keep him in my heart.
   3638 vaittēṉ matiyāl eṉatu uḷḷattu akattē
   eyttē oḻivēṉ allēṉ eṉṟum eppōtum
   moyttu ēy tirai mōtu taṇ pāṟkaṭaluḷāl
   paittu ēy cuṭarp pāmpu aṇai nam paraṉaiyē (10)
   3638. He is the highest lord
   and he sleeps on the shining thousand-headed Adishesha
   on the cool milky ocean always filled with rolling waves.
   With my cleverness I made him enter my heart.
   I will never grow tired of him or let him leave me.
   3639 cuṭarp pāmpu aṇai nam paraṉai tirumālai
   aṭic cērvakai vaṇ kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ
   muṭippāṉ coṉṉa āyirattu ip pattum caṉmam
   viṭat tēyntu aṟa nōkkum taṉ kaṇkaḷ civantē (11)
   3639. Saḍagopan of flourishing Thirukuruhur
   composed a thousand pasurams praising Thirumal,
   our highest god who sleeps on shining Adishesha.
   If devotees learn and recite these ten pasurams,
   the god’s eyes will become red
   as he grows angry at their karma
   and he will remove their births.
   -----------
   tiruvāymoḻi eṭṭām pattu (eṭṭām tirumoḻi, 3640-3650)
   āruyiriṉ ēṟṟattai emperumāṉ kāṭṭak kaṇṭu āḻvār pēcutal
   3640 kaṇkaḷ civantu periyavāy
   vāyum civantu kaṉintu uḷḷē
   veṇ pal ilaku cuṭar ilaku
   vilaku makara kuṇṭalattaṉ
   koṇṭal vaṇṇaṉ cuṭar muṭiyaṉ
   nāṉku tōḷaṉ kuṉi cārṅkaṉ
   oṇ caṅ(ku) katai vāḷ āḻiyāṉ
   oruvaṉ aṭiyēṉ uḷḷāṉē. (1)
   3640. He has beautiful large eyes,
   a soft red mouth and white shining teeth.
   His ears are adorned with shining makara earrings.
   The dark cloud-colored sole lord decorated with a shining crown
   stays in the mind of me his slave with his four arms
   that hold a bent bow, conch, club, sword and discus.
   3641 aṭiyēṉ uḷḷāṉ uṭal uḷḷāṉ
   aṇṭattu akattāṉ puṟattuḷḷāṉ
   paṭiyē itu eṉṟu uraikkalām
   paṭiyaṉ allaṉ paramparaṉ
   kaṭicēr nāṟṟattuḷ ālai
   iṉpat tuṉpak kaḻi nērmai
   oṭiyā iṉpap perumaiyōṉ
   uṇarvil umpar oruvaṉē (2)
   3641. I am his devotee and he is in my soul and body.
   He is in the sky, he is inside and outside of everyone.
   Nothing can be compared with the highest lord.
   He is in all fragrances.
   He takes away sorrows and gives happiness to all.
   He is the lord of the sky and he is joy for his devotees.
   He has undiminished fame and he is in the feelings of all.
   3642 uṇarvil umpar oruvaṉai
   avaṉatu aruḷāl uṟaṟporuṭṭu eṉ
   uṇarviṉ uḷḷē iruttiṉēṉ
   atuvum avaṉatu iṉ aruḷē
   uṇarvum uyirum uṭampum
   maṟṟu ulappilaṉavum paḻutēyām
   uṇarvaip peṟa ūrntu iṟa ēṟi
   yāṉum tāṉāy oḻintāṉē. (3)
   3642. No one can understand the highest god,
   yet I understand him and keep him in my heart
   only through his sweet grace.
   I understand that my feelings, life, body
   and all other things are not true.
   He gives me all my knowledge
   and has entered my heart and become one with me.
   3643 yāṉum tāṉāy oḻintāṉai
   yātum evarkkum muṉṉōṉai
   tāṉum civaṉum piramaṉum
   ākip paṇaitta taṉi mutalai
   tēṉum pālum kaṉṉalum
   amutum ākit tittittu eṉ
   ūṉil uyiril uṇarviṉil
   niṉṟa oṉṟai uṇarntēṉē (4)
   3643. He makes me and himself one.
   He is the ancient lord of all things and all people.
   He is Shiva and Brahma.
   He is unique, the cause that branched out to become everything.
   He is honey, milk, sugar juice and nectar.
   He is sweet.
   I know him who is in my body, my life and my awareness.
   3644 niṉṟa oṉṟai uṇarntēṉukku
   ataṉ nuṇ nērmai atu itu eṉṟu
   oṉṟum oruvarkku uṇaralākātu
   uṇarntum mēlum kāṇpu aritu
   ceṉṟu ceṉṟu paramparam āy
   yātum iṉṟit tēyntu aṟṟu
   naṉṟu tītu eṉṟu aṟivu aritāy
   naṉṟāy ñāṉam kaṭantatē (5)
   3644. I understand that he is the one thing that abides in all
   yet no one can understand his excellence,
   whether it is this or that.
   Even if someone understands it, he cannot really see it.
   It becomes smaller and smaller and, the highest of the high,
   it becomes nothing.
   No one has the knowledge to know whether it is good of bad.
   It is a good thing and abides even beyond knowing.
   3645 naṉṟāy ñāṉam kaṭantupōy
   nal intiriyam ellām īrttu
   oṉṟāyk kiṭanta arum perum pāḻ
   ulappu il ataṉai uṇarntu uṇarntu
   ceṉṟu āṅku iṉpat tuṉpaṅkaḷ
   ceṟṟuk kaḷaintu pacai aṟṟāl
   aṉṟē appōtē vīṭu
   atuvē vīṭu vīṭāmē (6)
   3645. It is a good thing and abides even beyond knowing.
   One should understand that it is a unique thing
   that is beyond all the senses.
   One must know that it is a rare, great thing
   not found in the world.
   If one destroys happiness and sorrow and removes all desires
   that very day and that very time he reaches moksha.
   Being in that state is truly moksha, it is liberation.
   3646 atuvē vīṭu vīṭupēṟṟu
   iṉpam tāṉum atu tēṟi
   etuvē tāṉum paṟṟu iṉṟi
   yātum ilikaḷ ākiṟkil
   atuvē vīṭu vīṭupēṟṟu
   iṉpam tāṉum atu tēṟātu
   etuvē vīṭu? ētu iṉpam? eṉṟu
   eyttār eyttār eyttārē (7)
   3646. If someone has no desire and owns nothing
   that is moksha and having attained it there is joy.
   If someone does not know this and worries,
   "What is moksha? What is happiness?"
   he will be confused and worried always.
   One should understand that true moksha
   is to remove all desires of the world.
   That is also true happiness.
   3647 eyttār eyttār eyttār
   eṉṟu illattārum puṟattārum
   moyttu āṅku alaṟi muyaṅka tām
   pōkumpōtu uṉmattarpōl
   pittē ēṟi anurākam
   poḻiyumpōtu em pemmāṉōṭu
   ottē ceṉṟu aṅku uḷḷam
   kūṭak kūṭiṟṟākil nal uṟaippē (8)
   3647. When you die, your family and relatives
   will worry and worry and crowd around you.
   Before you loose your awareness,
   if, as if you had become crazy, you think of god
   and a feeling of joy comes to your mind
   and your heart joins the dear lord
   that is the good way to obtain moksha.
   3648 kūṭiṟṟākil nal uṟaippu
   kūṭāmaiyaik kūṭiṉāl
   āṭal paṟavai uyar koṭi em
   māyaṉ āvatu atu atuvē
   vīṭaip paṇṇi oru paricē
   etirvum nikaḻvum kaḻivumāy
   ōṭit tiriyum yōkikaḷum
   uḷarum illai allarē (9)
   3648. Is it possible that the soul and the highest god
   who carries an eagle flag can become one? They are not the same.
   If they could become one then there is no god or soul.
   Maayan will be himself, and the soul will be itself.
   There are always yogis who run and wander around
   in the past, future and present saying that they will reach moksha,
   but their moksha is imaginary.
   Reaching god by devotion is the only moksha.
   3649 uḷarum illai allarāy
   uḷarāy illai ākiyē
   uḷar em oruvar avar vantu eṉ
   uḷḷattuḷḷē uṟaikiṉṟār
   vaḷarum piṟaiyum tēy piṟaiyum
   pōla acaivum ākkamum
   vaḷarum cuṭarum iruḷum pōl
   teruḷum maruḷum māyttōmē (10)
   3649. God is always there for his devotees.
   He is even there for those who say there is no god.
   He comes to me, enters my heart and stays there.
   Wisdom and ignorance come and go
   like the waxing and waning moon.
   We should get rid of clarity and confusion
   that come and go like the shining day and the night.
   3650 teruḷum maruḷum māyttu taṉ tiruntu cempoṉ kaḻal aṭikkīḻ
   aruḷi iruttum ammāṉām ayaṉām civaṉām
   tirumālāl aruḷap paṭṭa caṭakōpaṉ ōr āyirattuḷ ip pattāl
   aruḷi aṭikkīḻ iruttum nammaṇṇal karumāṇikkamē. (11)
   3650. Saḍagopan composed a thousand pasurams
   on Thirumal, the father of Shiva and Brahma.
   He removes the confusion and the ignorance of all
   and keeps his devotees beneath his feet
   ornamented with pure golden anklets.
   If devotees learn and recite these ten pasurams
   they will go and stay beneath the feet
   of our dark diamond-colored lord and receive his grace.
   --------------
   tiruvāymoḻi eṭṭām pattu (oṉpatām tirumoḻi, 3651-3661)
   talaiviyiṉ uṇmaik kātalait tāymārukkut tōḻi
   eṭutturaittu ayal maṇam vilakkal (tiruppuliyūr)
   3651 karu māṇikka malaimēl maṇit taṭam
   tāmaraik kāṭukaḷ pōl
   tirumārvu vāy kaṇ kai unti kāl uṭai
   āṭaikaḷ ceyya pirāṉ
   tirumāl emmāṉ ceḻu nīr vayal kuṭṭa
   nāṭṭut tiruppuliyūr
   aru māyaṉ pēr aṉṟip pēccu ilaḷ aṉṉaimīr!
   itaṟku eṉ ceykēṉō? (1)
   3651. Her friend says,
   "O mothers, how can I help my friend?
   Your daughter does not say anything
   except the name of the great Maayan
   whose divine chest, mouth, eyes, hands, legs and belly
   all look like lotuses blooming in a forest on a dark diamond hill.
   Our beautiful lord Thirumal,
   adorned with beautiful ornaments and garments,
   stays in Thirupuliyur in Kuṭṭanaḍu
   that flourishes with fields and good water."
   3652 aṉṉaimīr itaṟku eṉ ceykēṉ? aṇi
   mēruviṉ mītu ulavum
   tuṉṉu cūḻ cuṭar ñāyiṟum aṉṟiyum
   pal cuṭarkaḷum pōl
   miṉṉu nīḷ muṭi āram pal kalaṉ tāṉ
   uṭai emperumāṉ
   puṉṉai am poḻil cūḻ tiruppuliyūr
   pukaḻum ivaḷē (2)
   3652. Her friend says,
   "O mothers, how can I help my friend?
   Our lord wears a tall shining crown,
   a necklace and many ornaments
   and he looks like the sun shining with many bright rays
   as it circles Meru mountain.
   All she does is praise our dear god of Thirupuliyur
   surrounded with beautiful punnai groves."
   3653 pukaḻum ivaḷ niṉṟu irāppakal poru nīrk
   kaṭal tīp paṭṭu eṅkum
   tikaḻum eriyoṭu celvatu oppa
   ceḻum katir āḻi mutal
   pukaḻum poru paṭai ēnti pōr pukku
   acuraraip poṉṟuvittāṉ
   tikaḻum maṇi neṭu māṭam nīṭu
   tiruppuliyūr vaḷamē (3)
   3653. Her friend says,
   "She praises the dark ocean-colored god night and day.
   Carrying a shining discus and other weapons
   he entered into war like the shining fire
   that burns in the roaring ocean,
   fought with the Asurans and destroyed them.
   He stays in flourishing Thiruppuliyur
   filled with tall shining palaces studded with precious jewels."
   3654 ūr vaḷam kiḷar cōlaiyum karumpum
   perum cennelum cūḻntu
   ēr vaḷam kiḷar taṇ paṇaik kuṭṭa
   nāṭṭut tiruppuliyūr
   cīr vaḷam kiḷar mūvulaku uṇṭu umiḻ
   tēva pirāṉ
   pēr vaḷam kiḷarntaṉṟip pēccu ilaḷ
   iṉṟu ip puṉai iḻaiyē (4)
   3654. Her friend says,
   "O mother, your daughter adorned with lovely ornaments
   doesn’t praise anything except the fame
   of our dear god who swallowed all the famous three worlds,
   the lord of Thirupppuliyur in Kuṭṭanadu
   filled with cool fields that farmers plow
   where abundant paddy and sugarcane grow
   flourishing with good groves that increase its prosperity."
   3655 puṉai iḻaikaḷ aṇivum āṭai uṭaiyum
   putukkaṇippum
   niṉaiyum nīrmaiyatu aṉṟu ivaṭku itu niṉṟu
   niṉaikkappukkāl
   cuṉaiyiṉuḷ taṭam tāmarai malarum
   taṇ tiruppuliyūr
   muṉaivaṉ mūvulaku āḷi appaṉ
   tiru aruḷ mūḻkiṉaḷē. (5)
   3655. Her friend says,
   "O mother, if you consider the precious ornaments she wears now,
   her clothes and the smart way she thinks
   you will understand that she is plunged into the divine grace
   of the father, the lord, the ruler of all three worlds,
   the god in prosperous Thirupuliyur
   where large lotuses bloom in mountain springs."
   3656 tiru aruḷ mūḻki vaikalum ceḻu nīr
   niṟak kaṇṇa pirāṉ
   tiru aruḷkaḷum cērntamaikku aṭai
   yāḷam tirunta uḷa
   tiru aruḷ aruḷāl avaṉ ceṉṟu
   cēr taṇ tiruppuliyūr
   tiru aruḷ kamuku oṇ paḻattatu
   melliyal cevvitaḻē (6)
   3656. Her friend says,
   "O mother, the red lips of the gentle girl
   are like ripe kamuku fruits that flourish
   through the divine grace of the god of prosperous Thirupuliyur.
   They are a sign that every day she plunges
   into the love of the dark ocean-colored god Kaṇṇan
   and that she has the grace of the lord."
   3657 mel ilaic celva vaṇ koṭip pulka
   vīṅku iḷam tāḷ kamukiṉ
   mal ilai maṭal vāḻai īṉ kaṉi cūḻntu
   maṇam kamaḻntu
   pul ilait teṅkiṉūṭu kāl ulavum
   taṇ tiruppuliyūr
   mallal am celvak kaṇṇaṉ tāḷ aṭaintāḷ
   im maṭavaralē (7)
   3657. Her friend says,
   "O mother, this lovely girl reaches the feet
   of our precious Kaṇṇan, the warrior, the god of Thirupuliyur
   where the leaves of vines embrace the soft branches of the Kamugu trees
   and a lovely breeze spreads the fragrance of jasmine
   as it blows through the banana and coconut trees."
   3658 maṭavaral aṉṉaimīrkaṭku eṉ collic collukēṉ?
   mallaic celva
   vaṭamoḻi maṟaivāṇar vēḷviyuḷ ney aḻal
   vāṉ pukai pōyt
   tiṭa vicumpil amarar nāṭṭai maṟaikkum
   taṇ tiruppuliyūr
   paṭa aravu aṇaiyāṉ taṉ nāmam allāl
   paravāḷ ivaḷē (8)
   3658. Her friend says,
   "What can I say to the mothers of this beautiful girl?
   He sleeps on Adishesa on the water in rich Thiruppuliyur
   where the Brahmins of flourishing Mallai
   perform sacrifices, reciting the Vedas of the northern language,
   and the smoke from the fire as they pour ghee
   rises and hides the country of the gods in the wide sky.
   She doesn’t praise anything except his names."
   3659 paravāḷ ivaḷ niṉṟu irāppakal paṉi nīr
   niṟak kaṇṇa pirāṉ
   viravu ār icai maṟai vētiyar oli vēlaiyiṉ
   niṉṟu olippa
   karavu ār taṭamtoṟum tāmaraik kayam
   tīvikai niṉṟu alarum
   puravu ār kaḻaṉikaḷ cūḻ tiruppuliyūrp
   pukaḻ aṉṟi maṟṟē (9)
   3659. Her friend says,
   "Your daughter’s eyes are filled with tears
   and night and day she doesn’t praise anything
   except the fame of Thiruppuliyur
   surrounded with fields plowed by farmers
   where the lord Kaṇṇan stays
   and the sound of the Vedas that the Brahmins recite
   resounds like the sound of the ocean
   and the lotuses in the large ponds bloom like bright lamps.
   3660 aṉṟi maṟṟōr upāyam eṉ ivaḷ am
   taṇ tuḻāy kamaḻtal
   kuṉṟa mā maṇi māṭa māḷikaik kōlak
   kuḻāṅkaḷ malki
   teṉ ticait tilatam purai kuṭṭa
   nāṭṭut tiruppuliyūr
   niṉṟa māyap pirāṉ tiruvaruḷām
   ivaḷ nērpaṭṭatē? (10)
   3660. Here friend says,
   "She has the grace of Maayappiran,
   the god of Thippuliyur that is like a thilagam for southern Kuṭṭanaḍu
   surrounded by beautiful mountain-like palaces
   with porches studded with precious jewels.
   The only way to make her happy is to make her inhale
   the fragrance of the fresh thulasi garland of the lord."
   3661 nērpaṭṭa niṟai mūvulakukkum nāyakaṉ taṉ aṭimai
   nērpaṭṭa toṇṭar toṇṭar toṇṭar toṇṭaṉ caṭakōpaṉ col
   nērpaṭṭa tamiḻ mālai āyirattuḷ ivai pattum
   nērpaṭṭār avar nērpaṭṭār neṭumāṟku aṭimai ceyyavē (11)
   3661. Saḍagopan, the devotee of the devotees
   of the devotees of the devotees,
   became the slave of the lord of the marvelous three worlds
   and composed a garland of a thousand Tamil pasurams.
   If devotees learn and recite these ten pasurams
   they will have the fortune
   of becoming the slaves of Neḍumal.
   ------------
   tiruvāymoḻi eṭṭām pattu (pattām tirumoḻi, 3662-3672)
   pākavatarkaḷukkut tām aṭimaiyāyirukkum uṇmaiyai āḻvār pēcutal
   3662 neṭumāṟku aṭimai ceyvēṉpōl
   avaṉaik karuta vañcittu
   taṭumāṟṟu aṟṟa tīkkatikaḷ muṟṟum
   tavirnta catir niṉaintāl
   koṭu mā viṉaiyēṉ avaṉ aṭiyār
   aṭiyē kūṭum itu allāl
   viṭumāṟu eṉpatu eṉ antō!
   viyaṉ mūvulaku peṟiṉumē? (1)
   3662. If someone dances and wants
   to become a slave of Neḍumaal without cheating him,
   and if he wants to remove his karma
   and join the feet of the god’s devotees
   what achievement could be better than that?
   It is better to serve the devotees of the lord
   than to get the three wide worlds.
   3663 viyaṉ mūvulaku peṟiṉum pōy
   tāṉē tāṉē āṉālum
   puyal mēkampōl tirumēṉi
   ammāṉ puṉai pūm kaḻal aṭikkīḻc
   cayamē aṭimai talainiṉṟār
   tiruttāḷ vaṇaṅki immaiyē
   payaṉē iṉpam yāṉ peṟṟatu
   uṟumō pāviyēṉukkē? (2)
   3663. Even if I were to get all the three wide worlds
   and became the unrivaled king of those worlds
   would it be equal to the joy
   of serving in this birth the devotees of god as his slave
   and worshiping their feet?
   They abide beneath the ankleted feet
   of the god whose divine body is dark as a cloud.
   How could I get their good fortune in this birth?
   3664 uṟumō pāviyēṉukku iv
   ulakam mūṉṟum uṭaṉ niṟaiya
   ciṟu mā mēṉi nimirtta eṉ
   centāmaraikkaṇ tirukkuṟaḷaṉ
   naṟu mā virai nāḷ malar aṭikkīḻp
   pukutal aṉṟi avaṉ aṭiyār
   ciṟu mā maṉicarāy eṉṉai
   āṇṭār iṅkē tiriyavē? (3)
   3664. The lord with beautiful lotus eyes
   took the form of a small divine dwarf
   and measured all the three worlds.
   I don’t want even to stay
   beneath the fresh fragrant lotus feet of the lord
   if I, a sinner, could have the fortune
   of being the devotee of his devotees,
   ruled by them and they wander on this earth as ordinary people.
   3665 iṅkē tirintēṟku iḻukku uṟṟu eṉ
   iru mā nilam muṉ uṇṭu umiḻnta
   ceṅkōlatta pavaḷavāyc
   centāmaraikkaṇ eṉ ammāṉ
   poṅku ēḻ pukaḻkaḷ vāya āy
   pulaṉkoḷ vaṭivu eṉ maṉattatu āy
   aṅku ēy malarkaḷ kaiya āy
   vaḻipaṭṭu ōṭa aruḷilē? (4)
   3665. What is wrong if I run behind the devotees
   of the lotus-eyed lord to get their grace
   as they carry flowers in their beautiful hands,
   sing his abundant praise with their mouths
   and keep his form in their minds as all their senses
   enjoy my father who has beautiful lotus eyes and a red coral mouth,
   the god who swallowed the large world and spit it out.
   3666 vaḻipaṭṭu ōṭa aruḷ peṟṟu
   māyaṉ kōla malar aṭikkīḻc
   cuḻipaṭṭu ōṭum cuṭarccōti
   veḷḷattu iṉpuṟṟu iruntālum
   iḻipaṭṭu ōṭum uṭaliṉil
   piṟantu taṉ cīr yāṉ kaṟṟu
   moḻipaṭṭu ōṭum kaviamutam
   nukarcci uṟumō muḻutumē? (5)
   3666. Even if someone worships, receives the grace of Maayan,
   and, staying beneath his beautiful lotus feet,
   experiences bliss in a flood of glowing light
   as it flows like swirling, running water,
   can he get the nectar-like feeling of learning the great pasurams
   and singing them with the devotees of god
   so he feels as if he were flying
   even though his body is not pure enough
   to sing those pasurams?
   3667 nukarcci uṟumō mūvulakiṉ
   vīṭu pēṟu taṉ kēḻ il
   pukarc cem mukatta kaḷiṟu aṭṭa
   poṉ āḻikkai eṉ ammāṉ
   nikarc cem paṅki eri viḻikaḷ
   nīṇṭa acurar uyir ellām
   takarttu uṇṭu uḻalum puḷ pākaṉ
   periya taṉi māp pukaḻē? (6)
   3667. The lord, carrying a discus and riding on Garuḍa,
   killed many red-haired Asurans with burning eyes
   and he also destroyed the elephant with a dotted face.
   Even the joy of hearing the great fame of the lord and reaching moksha
   is not equal to the happiness someone can receive
   singing the pasurams that praise the lord.
   3668 taṉi māp pukaḻē eññāṉṟum
   niṟkum paṭiyāt tāṉ tōṉṟi
   muṉi māp pirama mutal vittāy
   ulakam mūṉṟum muḷaippitta
   taṉi māt teyvat taḷir aṭikkīḻp
   pukutal aṉṟi avaṉ aṭiyār
   naṉi māk kalavi iṉpamē
   nāḷum vāykka naṅkaṭkē (7)
   3668. I would like to stay beneath the feet,
   gentle as shoots, of the unique divine lord
   whose fame is excellent and everlasting
   and who created the sage Brahma and the three worlds,
   but it is better to receive the joy of joining always
   the devotees who sing and praise the ancient god.
   3669 nāḷum vāykka naṅkaṭku
   naḷir nīrk kaṭalaip paṭaittu taṉ
   tāḷum tōḷum muṭikaḷum
   camaṉ ilāta pala parappi
   nīḷum paṭar pūṅ kaṟpakak
   kāvum niṟai pal nāyiṟṟiṉ
   kōḷum uṭaiya maṇi malaipōl
   kiṭantāṉ tamarkaḷ kūṭṭamē. (8)
   3669. Our lord created the cool ocean of abundant water
   and lies on it like a mountain of jewels
   with the stars for his matchless arms and legs
   that are like the branches of the divine Karpaga tree
   as he wears a crown that shines like many suns.
   I long for the bliss of joining the devotees of the god.
   3670 tamarkaḷ kūṭṭa valviṉaiyai
   nācam ceyyum catu mūrtti
   amar koḷ āḻi caṅku vāḷ
   vil taṇṭu āti pal paṭaiyaṉ
   kumaraṉ kōla aiṅkaṇai vēḷ
   tātai kōtu il aṭiyār tam
   tamarkaḷ tamarkaḷ tamarkaḷām
   catirē vāykka tamiyēṟkē (9)
   3670. The lord dances on a pot
   and destroys the bad karma of his worshipers.
   He carries many weapons—
   a discus, conch, sword, bow and club.
   He is the father of the ever-young Kama
   who carries five beautiful flower arrows.
   I long to be a faultless devotee of the devotees
   of the devotees of the devotees of the lord.
   3671 vāykka tamiyēṟku ūḻitōṟu
   ūḻi ūḻi mā kāyām
   pūk koḷ mēṉi nāṉku tōḷ
   poṉ āḻik kai eṉ ammāṉ
   nīkkam illā aṭiyār tam
   aṭiyār aṭiyār aṭiyār em
   kōkkaḷ avarkkē kuṭikaḷāyc
   cellum nalla kōṭpāṭē (10)
   3671. My father has four arms and a dark body like a flower.
   He carries a golden discus in his hand and abides eon after eon.
   My only wish is to be the slave
   of the devotees of the devotees of the devotees of him.
   They are my lords, for they never leave our god.
   3672 nalla kōṭpāṭṭu ulakaṅkaḷ
   mūṉṟiṉuḷḷum tāṉ niṟainta
   allik kamalak kaṇṇaṉai
   am taṇ kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ
   collappaṭṭa āyirattuḷ
   ivaiyum pattum vallārkaḷ
   nalla patattāl maṉai vāḻvar
   koṇṭa peṇṭīr makkaḷē (11)
   3672. Saḍagopan of cool, lovely Thirukuruhur
   composed a thousand pasurams on lotus-eyed Kaṇṇan,
   the god of all the three worlds that follow good beliefs.
   If devotees learn and recite these ten pasurams
   they will live happily with their wives and children on the earth.
   ----------------
                     ___________________________________

        nammāḻvār tiruvāy moḻi oṉpatām pattu (3673 - 3783)
         Divyaprabhandam - Thiruvaymozhi - Onpataam Pathu 3673-3783

   tiruvāymoḻi oṉpatām pattu (mutal tirumoḻi, 3673-3683)
   karmavacattāl kiṭṭiya pattukkaḷai viṭṭu ellā vakaiyilum
   uṟaviṉaṉāṉa tirumālaic cērum eṉal (vaṭamaturai)
   3673 koṇṭa peṇṭir makkaḷ uṟṟār cuṟṟattavar piṟarum
   kaṇṭatōṭu paṭṭatu allāl kātal maṟṟu yātum illai
   eṇ ticaiyum kīḻum mēlum muṟṟavum uṇṭa pirāṉ
   toṇṭarōmāy uyyal allāl illai kaṇṭīr tuṇaiyē (1)
   3673. The love that wives, children, relatives,
   neighbors and others show is not real,
   it only appears to be true love.
   The only thing that can help us
   is to become the devotee of the all-powerful god
   who swallowed the eight directions
   and everything above and below it.
   3674 tuṇaiyum cārvum ākuvār pōl cuṟṟattavar piṟarum
   aṇaiya vanta ākkam uṇṭēl aṭṭaikaḷpōl cuvaippar
   kaṇai oṉṟālē ēḻ maramum eyta em kār mukilaip
   puṇai eṉṟu uyyap pōkal allāl illai kaṇṭīr poruḷē (2)
   3674. Friends, relatives, neighbors
   and others will cling to you like leeches if you have wealth.
   They will enjoy it and leave you if you become poor.
   He shot one arrow and destroyed the seven maraa trees.
   There is no help for you unless you take refuge
   in the dark cloud-colored god.
   He is like a boat in the storm of life.
   3675 poruḷ kai uṇṭāyc cellakkāṇil pōṟṟi eṉṟu ēṟṟu eḻuvar
   iruḷkoḷ tuṉpattu iṉmai kāṇil eṉṉē eṉpārum illai
   maruḷkoḷ ceykai acurar maṅka vaṭamaturaip piṟantāṟku
   aruḷkoḷ āḷāy uyyal allāl illai kaṇṭīr araṇē (3)
   3675. If you have wealth in your hands
   everyone will stay with you and say, "We praise you!"
   and enjoy your wealth,
   but if, as if you were entering darkness, you become poor,
   no one will come and even say,
   "What is this, you are poor!"
   The god destroyed the terrible Asurans and their cruel deeds.
   There is no refuge for you
   unless you become the devotee of the lord
   born in northern Madhura.
   3676 araṇam āvar aṟṟa kālaikku eṉṟu eṉṟu amaikkappaṭṭār
   iraṇam koṇṭa teppar āvar iṉṟiyiṭṭālum aḵtē
   varuṇittu eṉṉē vaṭamaturaip piṟantavaṉ vaṇ pukaḻē
   caraṇ eṉṟu uyyap pōkal allāl illai kaṇṭīr catirē (4)
   3676. People think their friends will help them
   when they are in need and keep them with them,
   but those they trust will be useless
   like a boat with a hole in it.
   Whatever you have given them,
   when you need them they will not help you.
   What is the use of my saying this?
   There are no good times and no protection in life
   unless you find refuge praising the generous fame
   of the lord born in northern Madhura.
   3677 caturam eṉṟu tammait tāmē cammatittu iṉmoḻiyār
   matura pōkam tuṟṟavarē vaiki maṟṟu oṉṟu uṟuvar
   atirkoḷ ceykai acurar maṅka vaṭamaturaip piṟantāṟku
   etirkoḷ āḷāy uyyal allāl illai kaṇṭīr iṉpamē (5)
   3677. The god, born in northern Madhura,
   fought and destroyed the cruel Asurans.
   Those who think that a happy life
   is to live with women whose words are sweet
   and to experience honey-like pleasure with them
   will be chased away by those women when they become poor.
   There is no way to survive unless you becomes a devotee of the god.
   3678 illai kaṇṭīr iṉpam antō uḷḷatu niṉaiyātē
   tollaiyārkaḷ ettaṉaivar tōṉṟik kaḻintoḻintār
   mallai mūtūr vaṭamaturaip piṟantavaṉ vaṇ pukaḻē
   colli uyyap pōkal allāl maṟṟoṉṟu illai curukkē (6)
   3678. There is no joy in this world.
   So many people have been born and died
   never learning the truth of life.
   The only refuge for you is to praise
   the generous fame of the god
   who was born in ancient flourishing northern Madhura.
   This is my humble advice to you.
   3679 maṟṟoṉṟu illai curuṅkac coṉṉōm mā nilattu ev uyirkkum
   ciṟṟa vēṇṭā cintippē amaiyum kaṇṭīrkaḷ antō
   kuṟṟam aṉṟu eṅkaḷ peṟṟat tāyaṉ vaṭamaturaip piṟantāṉ
   kuṟṟam il cīr kaṟṟu vaikal vāḻtal kaṇṭīr kuṇamē (7)
   3679. I would like to say one thing briefly.
   Don’t worry. Think deeply about what you should do.
   There is no other way for any life on the earth.
   It is not wrong to live every day
   praising the faultless greatness of the lord
   born in northern Madhura, our father and creator.
   3680 vāḻtal kaṇṭīr kuṇam itu antō māyavaṉ aṭi paravip
   pōḻtu pōka uḷḷakiṟkum puṉmai ilātavarkku
   vāḻ tuṇaiyā vaṭamaturaip piṟantavaṉ vaṇ pukaḻē
   vīḻ tuṇaiyāp pōm itaṉil yātum illai mikkatē (8)
   3680. The best way is to live praising him.
   What a wonder!
   For those who are not mean and pass their time
   praising the feet of Maayavan
   there is nothing better than praising the generous fame
   of the lord, born in northern Madhura
   and lovingly thinking of him as their refuge.
   3681 yātum illai mikku ataṉil eṉṟu eṉṟu atu karuti
   kātu ceyvāṉ kūtai ceytu kaṭaimuṟai vāḻkkaiyum pōm
   mā tukiliṉ koṭikkoḷ māṭa vaṭamaturaip piṟanta
   tātu cēr tōḷ kaṇṇaṉ allāl illai kaṇṭīr caraṇē (9)
   3681. If someone pursues useless things
   thinking nothing is better, he will lose his life.
   It is as if someone kept enlarging the holes in his ears
   until they are so big he cannot wear earrings.
   There is no refuge except Kaṇṇan, born in northern Madhura
   filled with palaces where silk-like flags fly
   whose feet are adorned with garlands dripping with pollen.
   3682 kaṇṇaṉ allāl illai kaṇṭīr caraṇ atu niṟka vantu
   maṇṇiṉ pāram nīkkutaṟkē vaṭamaturaip piṟantāṉ
   tiṇṇamā num uṭaimai uṇṭēl avaṉ aṭi cērttu uymmiṉō
   eṇṇa vēṇṭā nummatu ātum avaṉ aṉṟi maṟṟu illaiyē (10)
   3682. There is no refuge except Kaṇṇan.
   He was born in northern Madhura
   to take away the sufferings of the earth.
   If you have any wealth, lay it at his feet
   and, thinking he is your only refuge,
   join his feet and survive.
   Don’t think otherwise.
   Anything that belongs to you is his
   and there is nothing that does not belong to him.
   3683 ātum illai maṟṟu avaṉil eṉṟu atuvē tuṇintu
   tātu cēr tōḷ kaṇṇaṉaik kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ coṉṉa
   tītu ilāta oṇ tamiḻkaḷ ivai āyirattuḷ ip pattum
   ōta valla pirākkaḷ nammai āḷuṭaiyārkaḷ paṇṭē (11)
   3683. Saḍagopan of Thirukuruhur,
   thinking devotedly that there is nothing
   other than the god himself,
   composed a thousand beautiful faultless Tamil pasurams
   on Kaṇṇan adorned with garlands that drip pollen.
   If devotees learn and recite these ten wonderful Tamil pasurams
   they will be like our esteemed ancestors.
   -----------
   tiruvāymoḻi oṉpatām pattu (iraṇṭām tirumoḻi, 3684-3694)
   ellā uṟaviṉ kāriyamum tamakkuk kuṟaivillāmal aruḷumāṟu
   āḻvār emperumāṉaip pirārttittal (tiruppuḷiṅkuṭi)
   3684 paṇṭai nāḷālē niṉ tiru aruḷum
   paṅkayattāḷ tiru aruḷum
   koṇṭu niṉ kōyil cīyttu palpaṭikāl
   kuṭikuṭi vaḻivantu āṭceyyum
   toṇṭarōrkku aruḷi cōti vāy tiṟantu uṉ
   tāmaraik kaṇkaḷāl nōkkāy
   teṇ tiraip porunal taṇ paṇai cūḻnta
   tiruppuḷiṅkuṭik kiṭantāṉē (1)
   3684. You are the lord of Thirupuḷinguḍi
   surrounded by flourishing fields
   near the ocean that rolls with clear waves.
   Devotees come to the temple generation after generation
   where you and Lakshmi on a lotus
   have given divine grace to all from ancient times.
   Open your divine mouth and give your grace,
   looking at your devotees with your lotus eyes.
   3685 kuṭikkiṭantu ākkam ceytu niṉ tīrtta
   aṭimaik kuṟṟēvalceytu uṉ poṉ
   aṭik kaṭavātē vaḻi varukiṉṟa
   aṭiyarōrkku aruḷi nī orunāḷ
   paṭikku aḷavāka nimirtta niṉ pāta
   paṅkayamē talaikku aṇiyāy
   koṭikkoḷ poṉ matiḷ cūḻ kuḷir vayal cōlai
   tiruppuḷiṅkuṭik kiṭantāṉē (2)
   3685. You have given your grace to the devotees
   who worship your golden feet and serve you as slaves
   for generation after generation with their families.
   Adorn my head by placing your lotus feet
   that measured the world upon it.
   You are the god of Thirupuḷinguḍi
   surrounded by cool fields and golden walls where flags fly.
   3686 kiṭanta nāḷ kiṭantāy ettaṉai kālam
   kiṭatti uṉ tiruuṭampu acaiya
   toṭarntu kuṟṟēvalceytu tol aṭimai
   vaḻi varum toṇṭarōrkku aruḷi
   taṭam koḷ tāmaraik kaṇ viḻittu nī eḻuntu uṉ
   tāmarai maṅkaiyum nīyum
   iṭam koḷ mūvulakum toḻa iruntaruḷāy
   tiruppuḷiṅkuṭik kiṭantāṉē (3)
   3686. How long can you sleep on the ocean?
   Doesn’t it pain your body?
   Give your grace to us your slaves
   who serve you ceaselessly generation after generation.
   Open your large lotus eyes and get up
   with your wife Lakshmi on a lotus
   and, worshiped by all the three great worlds,
   give us your grace, O lord of Thiruppulinguḍi.
   3687 puḷiṅkuṭik kiṭantu varakuṇamaṅkai
   iruntu vaikuntattuḷ niṉṟu
   teḷinta eṉ cintaiyakam kaḻiyātē
   eṉṉai āḷvāy eṉakku aruḷi
   naḷirnta cīr ulakam mūṉṟuṭaṉ viyappa
   nāṅkaḷ kūttu āṭi niṉṟu ārppa
   paḷiṅku nīr mukiliṉ pavaḷam pōl kaṉivāy
   civappa nī kāṇa vārāyē (4)
   3687. In Thirupuḷinguḍi you recline, sleeping on the ocean,
   in Varagunamangai you are sitting
   and in Vaikuṇṭam you stand.
   Rule me, never leave my flawless heart.
   You have a shining cloud-colored body
   and a coral-red mouth as sweet as a fruit.
   Come and see us while we loudly sing your praise and dance
   as all the three worlds look on in awe and wonder.
   3688 pavaḷampōl kaṉi vāy civappa nī kāṇa
   vantu niṉ pal nilā muttam
   tavaḻ katir muṟuval ceytu niṉ tirukkaṇ
   tāmarai tayaṅka niṉṟaruḷāy
   pavaḷa naṉ paṭarkkīḻ caṅku uṟai porunal
   taṇ tiruppuḷiṅkuṭik kiṭantāy
   kavaḷa mā kaḷiṟṟiṉ iṭar keṭat taṭattuk
   kāy ciṉap paṟavai ūrntāṉē (5)
   3688. In flourishing Thirupulinguḍi
   you sleep on the ocean
   where conches and corals are produced.
   As you give your grace to us
   with your divine compassionate lotus eyes
   your coral-like mouth that is as sweet as a fruit becomes red
   and you smile making your moon-like teeth shine.
   When a crocodile in a pond caught Gajendran,
   the elephant that ate large balls of rice,
   you rode on an eagle and saved him.
   3689 kāy ciṉap paṟavai ūrntu poṉ malaiyiṉ
   mīmicaik kār mukil pōla
   mā ciṉa māli mālimāṉ eṉṟu aṅku
   avar paṭak kaṉaṉṟu muṉ niṉṟa
   kāy ciṉa vēntē katir muṭiyāṉē
   kali vayal tiruppuḷiṅkuṭiyāy
   kāy ciṉa āḻi caṅku vāḷ vil taṇṭu
   ēnti em iṭar kaṭivāṉē (6)
   3689. Riding your angry eagle,
   you fought with the fearful Asurans Mali and Malimaan,
   looking like a dark cloud on a golden hill.
   You are adorned with a shining crown.
   You are the god of Thirupulinguḍi
   surrounded by flourishing fields.
   You carry a discus, conch, sword, bow and club
   and angrily fight the Asurans in war,
   taking away the troubles of everyone.
   3690 em iṭar kaṭintu iṅku eṉṉai āḷvāṉē
   imaiyavar tamakkum āṅku aṉaiyāy
   cem maṭal malarun tāmaraip paḻaṉat
   taṇ tiruppuḷiṅkuṭik kiṭantāy
   nammuṭai aṭiyar kavvaikaṇṭu ukantu
   nām kaḷittu uḷam nalam kūra
   im maṭa ulakar kāṇa nī orunāḷ
   iruntiṭāy eṅkaḷ kaṇmukappē (7)
   3690. You took away our troubles and you rule us.
   You are the god of gods and relieve their suffering.
   You stay in flourishing Thirupuḷinguḍi
   filled with fields where lotuses with red petals bloom.
   Come before us one day
   so that the people of the beautiful world can see you
   and feel joy in their hearts
   as they see your devotees praise you.
   3691 eṅkaḷ kaṇ mukappē ulakarkaḷ ellām
   iṇai aṭi toḻutu eḻutu iṟaiñci
   taṅkaḷ aṉpu āra tamatu col valattāl
   talaittalaic ciṟantu pūcippa
   tiṅkaḷ cēr māṭat tiruppuḷiṅkuṭiyāy
   tiru vaikuntattuḷḷāy tēvā
   iṅkaṇ mā ñālattu itaṉuḷum orunāḷ
   iruntiṭāy vīṟṟu iṭam koṇṭē (8)
   3691. You stay in Thirupuḷinguḍi
   where the moon shines on the tops of the palaces.
   All in the world worship your feet,
   bow to you and praise you with loving words,
   worshiping you again and again.
   O god, you stay in divine Vaikuṇṭam.
   One day you should come to this wide world
   and stay here so that we can all see you.
   3692 vīṟṟu iṭamkoṇṭu viyaṉkoḷ mā ñālattu
   itaṉuḷum iruntiṭāy aṭiyōm
   pōṟṟi ōvātē kaṇ iṇai kuḷira
   putu malar ākattaip paruka
   cēṟṟu iḷa vāḷai cennelūṭu ukaḷum
   ceḻum paṉait tiruppuḷiṅkuṭiyāy
   kūṟṟamāy acurar kulamutal arinta
   koṭuviṉaip paṭaikaḷ vallāṉē (9)
   3692. You stay in Thirupuḷinguḍi
   flourishing with fields where vaalai fish frolic
   among the good paddy plants growing in the wet mud.
   Cruel as Yama with his strong weapons,
   you destroy the clan of Asurans.
   You should come and stay majestically in this wide world
   so your devotees may see your divine body
   as their eyes rejoice
   and they praise you without ceasing.
   3693 koṭu viṉaip paṭaikaḷ vallaiyāy amararkku
   iṭar keṭa acurarkaṭku iṭar cey
   kaṭu viṉai nañcē eṉṉuṭai amutē
   kali vayal tiruppuḷiṅkuṭiyāy
   vaṭivu iṇai illā malarmakaḷ maṟṟai
   nilamakaḷ piṭikkum mel aṭiyaik
   koṭuviṉaiyēṉum piṭikka nī orunāḷ
   kūvutal varutal ceyyāyē (10)
   3693. You are the god of Thirupuḷinguḍi
   surrounded with flourishing fields.
   You carry strong weapons for fighting dreadful battles.
   You took away the troubles of the gods in the sky
   and gave pain to the Asurans.
   You are poison for the Asurans but nectar for me.
   Matchless Lakshmi, on the lotus,
   and the earth goddess massage your soft feet.
   Call me one day or come here
   so I may massage your feet also.
   3694 kūvutal varutal ceytiṭāy eṉṟu
   kurai kaṭal kaṭaintavaṉ taṉṉai
   mēvi naṉku amarnta viyaṉ puṉal porunal
   vaḻuti nāṭaṉ caṭakōpaṉ
   nā iyal pāṭal āyirattuḷḷum
   ivaiyum ōr pattum vallārkaḷ
   ōvutal iṉṟi ulakam mūṉṟu aḷantāṉ
   aṭi iṇai uḷḷattu ōrvārē (11)
   3694. Saḍagopan of the Pandiyan land
   where pure water is abundant
   composed a thousand musical pasurams
   praising the lord who churned the roaring milky ocean.
   If devotees learn and recite well these ten pasurams
   in which the poet asks the god,
   "Call me to come to you or you come to me!"
   they will think in their hearts unceasingly
   of his two feet that measured the three worlds.
   -----------
   tiruvāymoḻi oṉpatām pattu (mūṉṟām tirumoḻi, 3695-3705)
   emperumāṉōṭu uḷḷa toṭarpiṉaik kaṇṭa āḻvār avaṉatu
   cīlattil īṭupaṭṭuk kūṟutal
   3695 ōr āyiramāy ulaku ēḻ aḷikkum
   pēr āyiram koṇṭatu ōr pīṭu uṭaiyaṉ
   kār āyiṉa kāḷa nal mēṉiyiṉaṉ
   nārayaṇaṉ naṅkaḷ pirāṉ avaṉē (1)
   3695. He has a thousand names
   and he has the fame
   of protecting the seven worlds with his thousand names.
   He has a divine body that is as dark as a cloud
   and he is truly Narayanan, our dear lord.
   3696 avaṉē akal ñālam paṭaittu iṭantāṉ
   avaṉē aḵtu uṇṭu umiḻntāṉ aḷantāṉ
   avaṉē avaṉum avaṉum avaṉum
   avaṉē maṟṟu ellāmum aṟintaṉamē (2)
   3696. He created the wide world and split it open.
   He swallowed the world and spit it out.
   He measured the world.
   He is indeed Shiva, Brahma and Indra,
   and he himself is each of them
   and all creatures and things in this world.
   We know this.
   3697 aṟintaṉa vēta arum poruḷ nūlkaḷ
   aṟintaṉa koḷka arum poruḷ ātal
   aṟintaṉar ellām ariyai vaṇaṅki
   aṟintaṉar nōykaḷ aṟukkum maruntē (3)
   3697. The Vedas, the sastras, the puranas and epics
   all say they know that he is the true unattainable object.
   Wise men and sages worship the lord Hari
   and know him as the remedy for any sickness.
   He gave me the fortune of knowing him truly.
   3698 maruntē naṅkaḷ pōka makiḻccikku eṉṟu
   perum tēvar kuḻāṅkaḷ pitaṟṟum pirāṉ
   karum tēvaṉ emmāṉ kaṇṇaṉ viṇ ulakam
   tarum tēvaṉaic cōrēl kaṇṭāy maṉamē (4)
   3698. The great group of gods prattle and praise him
   saying, "You take away the joy that our desires give
   and cure us from the troubles they cause."
   He, the dark lord Kaṇṇan, is our father,
   and he rules the sky.
   O heart, do not let him go away from my mind.
   3699 maṉamē uṉṉai valviṉaiyēṉ irantu
   kaṉamē colliṉēṉ itu cōrēl kaṇṭāy!
   puṉam mēviya pūn taṇ tuḻāy alaṅkal
   iṉam ētum ilāṉai aṭaivatumē (5)
   3699. O heart, I have done much bad karma
   I beg you and tell you firmly,
   "Do not leave him!"
   He wears a beautiful cool thulasi garland from the forest.
   Your aim should be to reach the god
   who does not belong to anything.
   3700 aṭaivatum aṇi ār malar maṅkaitōḷ
   miṭaivatum acurarkku vem pōrkaḷē
   kaṭaivatum kaṭaluḷ amutam eṉ maṉam
   uṭaivatum avaṟkē oruṅkākavē (6)
   3700. He embraces the beautiful arms
   of Lakshmi, on a lovely lotus.
   He fights only with the Asurans in his cruel wars.
   He churned the milky ocean and took its nectar.
   My heart melts only for him.
   3701 ākam cēr naraciṅkam atu āki ōr
   ākam vaḷ ukirāl piḷantāṉ uṟai
   māka vaikuntam kāṇpataṟku eṉ maṉam
   ēkam eṇṇum irāppakal iṉṟiyē (7)
   3701. He took the form of a man-lion
   and split open the chest of Hiranyan with his sharp nails.
   Night and day my heart longs to see him,
   the god of the sky in Vaikuṇṭam.
   3702 iṉṟip pōka iruviṉaiyum keṭuttu
   oṉṟi yākkai pukāmai uyyakkoḷvāṉ
   niṉṟa vēṅkaṭam nīḷ nilattu uḷḷatu
   ceṉṟu tēvarkaḷ kaitoḻuvārkaḷē (8)
   3702. He destroys good and bad karma
   and saves us from future births
   so our body will not be born again.
   The gods of the sky come to Venkaṭam and worship the lord.
   I will not leave this place—
   there is no difference between heaven and the Venkaṭam hills.
   3703 toḻutu mā malar nīr cuṭar tūpam koṇṭu
   eḻutum eṉṉum itu mikai ātaliṉ
   paḻutu il tol pukaḻp pāmpu aṇaip paḷḷiyāy
   taḻuvumāṟu aṟiyēṉ uṉa tāḷkaḷē (9)
   3703. It seems it is not enough
   to worship you with beautiful flowers,
   water and shining lamps and fragrance
   because I have not seen you.
   You are famous from ancient times
   and you sleep on a faultless snake bed.
   I do not know how to embrace your feet.
   3704 tāḷa tāmaraiyāṉ uṉatu untiyāṉ
   vāḷ koḷ nīḷ maḻu āḷi uṉ ākattāṉ
   āḷarāyt toḻuvārum amararkaḷ
   nāḷum eṉ pukaḻkō uṉa cīlamē? (10)
   3704. Brahma stays on a lotus
   and its stalk grows from your navel.
   Shiva who carries a shining mazhu weapon
   stays on your body.
   The gods in the sky come and worship you on this earth.
   I cannot truly praise your divine nature
   even if I praise you all my life.
   3705 cīlam ellai ilāṉ aṭimēl aṇi
   kōlam nīḷ kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ col
   mālai āyirattuḷ ivai pattiṉiṉ
   pālar vaikuntam ēṟutal pāṉmaiyē (11)
   3705. Saḍagopan of beautiful Thirukuruhur
   composed a garland of thousand pasurams on the lord
   whose goodness has no bounds.
   If devotees learn and recite these ten pasurams
   they will surely reach Vaikuṇṭam.
   -------------
   tiruvāymoḻi oṉpatām pattu (nāṉkām tirumoḻi, 3706-3716)
   emperumāṉaik kāṇa virumpi aḻaittu tām virumpiya
   vaṇṇamē kaṇṭu makiḻntamai kūṟal
   3706 mai ār karuṅkaṇṇi kamala malarmēl
   ceyyāḷ tirumārviṉil cēr tirumālē
   veyyār cuṭar āḻi curi caṅkam ēntum
   kaiyā uṉṉaik kāṇak karutum eṉ kaṇṇē (1)
   3706. O Thirumaal, the beautiful goddess Lakshmi
   who has eyes dark as kohl
   stays with you on a lotus on your divine chest.
   You carry in your hands
   a curved conch and a discus that has shining rays.
   My eyes long to see you.
   3707 kaṇṇē uṉṉaik kāṇak karuti eṉ neñcam
   eṇṇē koṇṭa cintaiyatāy niṉṟu iyampum
   viṇṇōr muṉivarkku eṉṟum kāṇpu ariyāyai
   naṇṇātoḻiyēṉ eṉṟu nāṉ aḻaippaṉē (2)
   3707. You are my beloved.
   My heart has one desire and that is to see you
   and call you with love.
   Even the gods in the sky and the sages cannot see you,
   but I call you and think that I will not leave unless I join you.
   3708 aḻaikkiṉṟa aṭināyēṉ nāy kūḻai vālāl
   kuḻaikkiṉṟatu pōla eṉ uḷḷam kuḻaiyum
   maḻaikku aṉṟu kuṉṟam eṭuttu ānirai kāttāy
   piḻaikkiṉṟatu aruḷ eṉṟu pētuṟuvaṉē (3)
   3708. You carried Govardhana mountain
   and protected the cows from the storm.
   I am like a dog wagging his tail lovingly
   as I call you with my heart that melts for your love.
   I am worried that I cannot receive your grace.
   3709 uṟuvatu itu eṉṟu uṉakku āḷ paṭṭu niṉkaṇ
   peṟuvatu etukol eṉṟu pētaiyēṉ neñcam
   maṟukal ceyyum vāṉavar tāṉavarkku eṉṟum
   aṟivatu ariya ariyāya ammāṉē (4)
   3709. O father, you took the form of a man-lion.
   The gods in the sky and the Asurans do not know who you are.
   You are matchless, O my father.
   My heart’s only thought is to be a slave to you,
   but my poor heart does not know
   how it will come to be in your presence.
   3710 ariyāya ammāṉai amarar pirāṉai
   periyāṉai piramaṉai muṉ paṭaittāṉai
   vari vāḷ araviṉ aṇaip paḷḷikoḷkiṉṟa
   kariyāṉ kaḻal kāṇak karutum karuttē (5)
   3710. Our father, the god of the gods, took the form of a man-lion.
   He created Shiva and Brahma in ancient times.
   He sleeps on a shining, lined snake.
   My only desire is to see the ornamented feet of the dark lord.
   3711 karuttē uṉṉaik kāṇak karuti eṉ neñcattu
   iruttāka iruttiṉēṉ tēvarkaṭku ellām
   viruttā viḷaṅkum cuṭarccōti uyarattu
   oruttā uṉṉai uḷḷum eṉ uḷḷam ukantē (6)
   3711. You are my thought.
   I want to see you and keep you in my heart firmly.
   You are the god of the gods in the sky.
   You are the highest.
   You are a matchless bright light.
   My heart thinks happily only of you.
   3712 ukantē uṉṉai uḷḷum eṉ uḷḷattu akampāl
   akam tāṉ amarntē iṭam koṇṭa amalā
   mikum tāṉavaṉ mārvu akalam iru kūṟā
   nakantāy naraciṅkam atu āya uruvē (7)
   3712. My heart thinks of you happily.
   O faultless one, you desired me and came to me
   and stayed in my heart.
   You took the form of a man-lion
   and split the chest of the arrogant Asuran Hiraṇyan in two.
   3713 uru ākiya āṟu camayaṅkaṭku ellām
   poru āki niṉṟāṉ avaṉ ellāp poruṭkum
   aru ākiya ātiyai tēvarkaṭku ellām
   karu ākiya kaṇṇaṉai kaṇṭukoṇṭēṉē (8)
   3713. He is the origin of all the six religions
   and the inner soul of all things and creatures.
   He is ancient and formless
   and he is the origin of all the gods in the sky.
   I have found that Kaṇṇan.
   3714 kaṇṭukoṇṭu eṉ kaṇ iṇai ārak kaḷittu
   paṇṭai viṉaiyāyiṉa paṟṟōṭu aṟuttu
   toṇṭarkku amutu uṇṇac col mālaikaḷ coṉṉēṉ
   aṇṭattu amarar perumāṉ aṭiyēṉē (9)
   3714. He is precious like my eyes
   and I am filled with joy to have found him.
   All my old karma has been rooted out.
   I have composed pasurams on the god
   that are like nectar for his devotees.
   I am a devotee of the highest god of the gods in the sky.
   3715 aṭiyāṉ ivaṉ eṉṟu eṉakku ār aruḷ ceyyum
   neṭiyāṉai niṟai pukaḻ am ciṟaip puḷḷiṉ
   koṭiyāṉai kuṉṟāmal ulakam aḷanta
   aṭiyāṉai aṭaintu aṭiyēṉ uyntavāṟē (10)
   3715. Neḍumal gives his grace to me
   thinking, "He is my devotee."
   He carries the banner of the famous Garuda
   that has beautiful wings.
   He measured the whole earth
   covering it completely with his one foot.
   I received him and I am saved.
   3716 āṟā matayāṉai aṭarttavaṉ taṉṉai
   cēṟu ār vayal teṉ kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ
   nūṟē coṉṉa ōr āyirattuḷ ip pattum
   ēṟē tarum vāṉavar tam iṉ uyirkkē (11)
   3716. Saḍagopan of southern Thirukuruhur
   surrounded by flourishing fields of earth
   composed a thousand pasurams on the god
   who conquered the rutting elephant Kuvalayabeedam.
   If devotees learn and recite these ten pasurams
   they will reach the god, the dear life of the gods in the sky.
   ------------
   tiruvāymoḻi oṉpatām pattu (aintām tirumoḻi, 3717-3727)
   talaivaṉaik kāṇa ācaiyuṟṟa talaivi avaṉai niṉaivūṭṭum
   poruḷkaḷāl taḷarntamai kūṟal
   3717 iṉ uyirc cēvalum nīrum kūvikkoṇṭu iṅku ettaṉai
   eṉ uyir nōva miḻaṟṟēlmiṉ kuyil pēṭaikāḷ
   eṉ uyirk kaṇṇa pirāṉai nīr varak kūvukilīr
   eṉ uyir kūvik koṭuppārkkum ittaṉai vēṇṭumō? (1)
   3717. She says, "O cuckoo birds!
   You and your sweet mates, as precious to you as life,
   cause me pain as you call each other.
   Do not prattle like this.
   Lord Kaṇṇan is as precious as my life
   and you are not calling him.
   If you are cooing to take my life and give it to him,
   do you need to coo like this?"
   3718 ittaṉai vēṇṭuvatu aṉṟu antō aṉṟil pēṭaikāḷ
   ettaṉai nīrum num cēvalum karaintu ēṅkutir?
   vittakaṉ kōvintaṉ meyyaṉ allaṉ oruvarkkum
   attaṉai ām iṉi eṉ uyir avaṉ kaiyatē (2)
   3718. She says, "O andril birds!
   Do you need to do these things?
   How long will you and your mate long and call for each other?
   The clever Govindan is not truthful to anyone.
   Why do I say these things?
   My life is in his hands."
   3719 avaṉ kaiyatē eṉatu ār uyir aṉṟil pēṭaikāḷ
   evaṉ colli nīr kuṭaintu āṭutir puṭai cūḻavē?
   tavam ceytillā viṉaiyāṭṭiyēṉ uyir iṅku uṇṭō
   evaṉ colli niṟṟum num ēṅku kūkkural kēṭṭumē? (3)
   3719. She says, "O dear andril birds!
   My dear life is in his hands.
   How can you join together, speak with each other,
   and plunge into the water with your beloved mates?
   How is it I am still alive
   after hearing you chatter to each other?"
   3720 kūkkural kēṭṭum nam kaṇṇaṉ māyaṉ veḷippaṭāṉ
   mēl kiḷai koḷḷēlmiṉ nīrum cēvalum kōḻikāḷ
   vākkum maṉamum karumamum namakku āṅkatē
   ākkaiyum āviyum antaram niṉṟu uḻalumē (4)
   3719. She says, "O dear andril birds!
   My dear life is in his hands.
   How can you join together, speak with each other,
   and plunge into the water with your beloved mates?
   How is it I am still alive
   after hearing you chatter to each other?"
   3721 antaram niṉṟu uḻalkiṉṟa yāṉuṭaip pūvaikāḷ
   num tiṟattu ētum iṭai illai kuḻaṟēlmiṉō
   intira ñālaṅkaḷ kāṭṭi iv ēḻ ulakum koṇṭa
   nam tiru mārpaṉ nam āvi uṇṇa naṉku eṇṇiṉāṉ (5)
   3721. She says, "O my puvai birds!
   You move all over in the sky.
   You should not feel sorry for me.
   It isn’t your fault. Don’t prattle.
   The lord has Lakshmi on his chest.
   He swallowed all the seven worlds
   and does many magical tricks.
   He is thinking of taking my life away.
   Does he think this is something good?"
   3722 naṉku eṇṇi nāṉ vaḷartta ciṟu kiḷip paitalē
   iṉ kural nī miḻaṟṟēl eṉ ār uyirk kākuttaṉ
   niṉ ceyya vāy okkum vāyaṉ kaṇṇaṉ kai kāliṉaṉ
   niṉ pacum cāma niṟattaṉ kūṭṭuṇṭu nīṅkiṉāṉ (6)
   3722. She says, "O little parrot!
   I raised you with love and affection and kept you happy.
   Don’t prattle on with your sweet voice.
   He is Kakusthan my dear beloved god.
   He has a mouth as red as yours.
   He has beautiful eyes, hands and legs.
   He has a green color like yours.
   He left after embracing me."
   3723 kūṭṭuṇṭu nīṅkiya kōlat tāmaraik kaṇ cevvāy
   vāṭṭam il eṉ karumāṇikkam kaṇṇaṉ māyaṉpōl
   kōṭṭiya villoṭu miṉṉum mēkak kuḻāṅkaḷkāḷ
   kāṭṭēlmiṉ num uru eṉ uyirkku atu kālaṉē (7)
   3723. She says,
   "O group of clouds shining with lightning and rainbows,
   you have the color of Maayan,
   the god Kaṇṇan, the faultless dark diamond
   with lovely lotus eyes and a red mouth.
   Do not come in front of me.
   You are like Yama to my life."
   3724 uyirkku atu kālaṉ eṉṟu ummai yāṉ irantēṟku nīr
   kuyil paitalkāḷ kaṇṇaṉ nāmamē kuḻaṟik koṉṟīr
   tayirp paḻañ cōṟṟoṭu pāl aṭicilum tantu col
   payiṟṟiya nal vaḷam ūṭṭiṉīr! paṇpu uṭaiyīrē (8)
   3724. She says,
   "I begged you to go and tell him that he is like Yama for me
   because I love him and may not live.
   O soft baby cuckoo bird!
   You are always prattling the names of Kaṇṇan.
   I gave you yogurt mixed with old rice, fruits and sweet rice
   and taught you to speak.
   Is this how you repay me?
   Is this good?"
   3725 paṇpu uṭai vaṇṭoṭu tumpikāḷ paṇ miḻaṟṟēlmiṉ
   puṇ purai vēl koṭu kuttāl okkum num iṉ kural
   taṇ peru nīrt taṭam tāmarai malarntāl okkum
   kaṇ perum kaṇṇaṉ nam āvi uṇṭu eḻa naṇṇiṉāṉ (9)
   3725. She says,
   "O female bees, you are with your excellent lovers.
   Don’t sing and fly around.
   Even though you sing sweetly
   your sweet voices hurt me
   as if someone were pricking a wound with a sharp spear.
   The god Kaṇṇan has large eyes like lotus flowers
   that bloom in a cool wide pool.
   He approached us only to take away our life."
   3726 eḻa naṇṇi nāmum nam vāṉa nāṭaṉōṭu oṉṟiṉōm
   paḻaṉa nal nāraik kuḻāṅkaḷkāḷ payiṉṟu eṉ iṉi?
   iḻai nalla ākkaiyum paiyavē puyakku aṟṟatu
   taḻai nalla iṉpam talaippeytu eṅkum taḻaikkavē (10)
   3726. She says,
   "O good naarai birds, you stay in the fields.
   We love the lord of the sky.
   What is the use of thinking of anything else?
   I am not interested in wearing ornaments
   and talking about things I enjoy.
   Let this world flourish and people have their pleasure."
   3727 iṉpam talaippeytu eṅkum taḻaitta pal ūḻikkut
   taṉ pukaḻ ēttat taṉakku aruḷ ceyta māyaṉait
   teṉ kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ col āyirattuḷ ivai
   oṉpatōṭu oṉṟukkum mūvulakum urukumē (11)
   3727. Saḍagopan of southern Kuruhur
   composed a thousand pasurams on the god Maayan.
   The lord gave his grace to make this world flourish
   and to make the people of the world
   live happily for many eons and praise him.
   If people in the three worlds learn and recite these ten pasurams
   they will melt in devotion for the lord.
   ---------
   tiruvāymoḻi oṉpatām pattu (āṟām tirumoḻi, 3728-3738)
   āḻvār emperumāṉatu cīrait tuyarattuṭaṉ kūṟutal (tirukkāṭkarai)
   3728 urukumāl neñcam uyiriṉ paramaṉṟi
   perukumāl vēṭkaiyum eṉ ceykēṉ toṇṭaṉēṉ
   teruvu ellām kāvi kamaḻ tirukkāṭkarai
   maruviya māyaṉ taṉ māyam niṉaitoṟē? (1)
   3728. When I think of the maaya of you,
   the god Maayan of Thirukkaaṭkarai
   where the fragrance of kaavi blossoms spreads
   over all the streets, my heart melts
   and cannot control its always increasing love.
   I am your servant, what should I do?
   3729 niṉaitoṟum collumtoṟum neñcu iṭintu ukum
   viṉaikoḷ cīr pāṭilum vēm eṉatu ār uyir
   cuṉaikoḷ pūñcōlait teṉ kāṭkarai eṉ appā
   niṉaikilēṉ nāṉ uṉakku āṭceyyum nīrmaiyē (2)
   3729. You are my father
   and you stay in southern Thirukaaṭkarai
   surrounded by blooming groves and springs.
   Whenever I think or speak of you
   my heart suffers and goes to pieces.
   Whenever I sing of your heroic deeds
   my dear life burns. I do not know how to serve you.
   3730 nīrmaiyāl neñcam vañcittup pukuntu eṉṉai
   īrmaiceytu eṉ uyir āy eṉ uyir uṇṭāṉ
   cīr malku cōlait teṉ kāṭkarai eṉ appaṉ
   kār mukil vaṇṇaṉ taṉ kaḷvam aṟikilēṉ (3)
   3730. My father, the lord of the southern Thirukaaṭkarai
   surrounded by beautiful flourishing groves
   attracted me and entered my heart.
   He bewitched me, became my life
   and took me over.
   He has the color of a dark cloud—
   I do not understand his tricks.
   3731 aṟikilēṉ taṉṉuḷ aṉaittu ulakum niṟka
   neṟimaiyāl tāṉum avaṟṟuḷ niṟkum pirāṉ
   veṟi kamaḻ cōlait teṉ kāṭkarai eṉ appaṉ
   ciṟiya eṉ ār uyir uṇṭa tiru aruḷē (4)
   3731. My father, the god of southern Thirukaaṭkarai
   where the groves spread their fragrance everywhere
   contains all the worlds in himself
   and abides in all of them with virtue.
   I cannot understand his divine grace
   that has taken over my tiny dear life.
   3732 tiru aruḷ ceypavaṉ pōla eṉṉuḷ pukuntu
   uruvamum ār uyirum uṭaṉē uṇṭāṉ
   tiru vaḷar cōlait teṉ kāṭkarai eṉ appaṉ
   karu vaḷar mēṉi eṉ kaṇṇaṉ kaḷvaṅkaḷē (5)
   3732. My father of southern Thirukaaṭkarai
   where lovely groves grow
   entered my heart as if to give his divine grace to me.
   He took over my body and my dear life at once.
   How can I describe the tricks of my dark-colored Kaṇṇan?
   3733 eṉ kaṇṇaṉ kaḷvam eṉakkuc cemmāy niṟkum
   am kaṇṇaṉ uṇṭa eṉ ār uyirk kōtu itu
   puṉkaṇmai eyti pulampi irāppakal
   eṉ kaṇṇaṉ eṉṟu avaṉ kāṭkarai ēttumē (6)
   3733. I think the tricks of my Kaṇṇan are lovely.
   This is how my beautiful Kaṇṇan takes over my dear life.
   Night and day I worry, prattle on
   and praise Thirukaaṭkarai, saying, "He is my Kaṇṇan."
   3734 kāṭkarai ēttum ataṉuḷ kaṇṇā eṉṉum
   vēṭkai nōy kūra niṉaintu karaintu ukum
   āṭkoḷvāṉ ottu eṉ uyir uṇṭa māyaṉāl
   kōḷ kuṟaipaṭṭatu eṉ ār uyir kōḷ uṇṭē (7)
   3734. When I say, "O Kaṇṇan, you stay in Thirukaaṭkarai,"
   my desire for the god increases
   and I think of him always and melt.
   He is the Maayan and he took me as his slave.
   There is only a little of my life left—
   I want to spend that time praising Thirukaaṭkarai.
   3735 kōḷ uṇṭāṉ aṉṟi vantu eṉ uyir tāṉ uṇṭāṉ
   nāḷum nāḷ vantu eṉṉai muṟṟavum tāṉ uṇṭāṉ
   kāḷa nīr mēkat teṉ kāṭkarai eṉ appaṟku
   āḷ aṉṟē paṭṭatu? eṉ ār uyir paṭṭatē (8)
   3735. He took me as his slave.
   He took my life as his.
   He comes to me every day and makes me his.
   My dear life and my heart belong to my father,
   the lord of southern Thirukaaṭkarai
   where beautiful dark clouds float in the sky.
   3736 ār uyir paṭṭatu eṉatu uyir paṭṭatu
   pēr itaḻt tāmaraik kaṇ kaṉi vāyatu ōr
   kār eḻil mēkat teṉ kāṭkarai kōyil koḷ
   cīr eḻil nāl taṭam tōḷ teyvavārikkē? (9)
   3736. The divine ocean-like god has four large arms,
   a mouth sweet as a fruit, eyes like lotuses with large petals
   and a beautiful dark cloud-colored body.
   He is the god of the temple in southern Tirukaaṭkarai
   and my dear life has joined him.
   3737 vārikkoṇṭu uṉṉai viḻuṅkuvaṉ kāṇil eṉṟu
   ārvu uṟṟa eṉṉai oḻiya eṉṉil muṉṉam
   pārittut tāṉ eṉṉai muṟṟap parukiṉāṉ
   kār okkum kāṭkarai appaṉ kaṭiyaṉē (10)
   3737. He embraced me and said,
   "See, I will embrace you and you will join me completely."
   I fell into my love for him and lost myself.
   The dark cloud-colored god came before me
   and swallowed me entirely.
   The god of Thirukaaṭkarai is not easy to see.
   3738 kaṭiyaṉāyk kañcaṉaik koṉṟa pirāṉ taṉṉai
   koṭi matiḷ teṉ kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ col
   vaṭivu amai āyirattu ip pattiṉāl caṉmam
   muṭivu eyti nācam kaṇṭīrkaḷ em kāṉalē (11)
   3738. Saḍagopan of southern Thirukuruhur
   surrounded by strong walls
   composed a thousand good pasurams
   on the lord who killed the cruel Asuran Kamsan.
   If people learn and recite these ten pasurams
   they will have no future births.
   ------------
   tiruvāymoḻi oṉpatām pattu (ēḻām tirumoḻi, 3739-3749)
   em perumāṉatu vaṭivaḻakē paṟṟukkōṭāka talaivi tirumūḻikkaḷattē
   paṟavaikaḷait tūtuviṭal (tirumūḻikkaḷam)
   3739 em kāṉal akam kaḻivāy irai tērntu iṅku iṉitu amarum
   ceṅkāla maṭa nārāy tirumūḻikkaḷattu uṟaiyum
   koṅku ār pūn tuḻāy muṭi em kuṭakkūttarkku eṉ tūtāy
   num kālkaḷ eṉ talaimēl keḻumīrō numarōṭē (1)
   3739. She says,
   "O lovely red-legged naarai birds!
   You come to these backwaters on the seashore
   and sit sweetly looking for your food.
   He danced on a pot and wears blooming thulasi garlands
   dripping with honey in his hair.
   Won’t you go as my messengers to him
   flying above my head through the sky with your friends
   and tell him of my love?"
   3740 numarōṭum piriyātē nīrum num cēvalumāy
   amar kātal kuruku iṉaṅkāḷ aṇi mūḻikkaḷattu uṟaiyum
   emarālum paḻippuṇṭu iṅku eṉ tammāl iḻippuṇṭu?
   tamarōṭu aṅku uṟaivārkkut takkilamē? kēḷīrē (2)
   3740. She says, "O kurugu birds!
   You and your beloved mates
   stay together lovingly, never separating.
   He is blamed by my relatives
   and I am disgraced because of my love for him.
   He stays in lovely Thirumuzhikkalam with his beloved wives.
   Go and ask him ‘Am I not fit for your love?’"
   3741 takkilamē kēḷīrkaḷ! taṭam puṉalvāy irai tērum
   kokku iṉaṅkāḷ kuruku iṉaṅkāḷ kuḷirmūḻikkaḷattu uṟaiyum
   cekkamalattu alar pōlum kaṇ kai kāl ceṅkaṉi vāy
   ak kamalattu ilaip pōlum tirumēṉi aṭikaḷukkē (3)
   3741. She says,
   "Am I not fit for his love?
   O kokku birds, kuruku birds,
   you search for food in the abundant water by the shore.
   Go and ask the lord of Thirumuzhikkaḷam
   why I am not fit for his love?
   His eyes are as lovely as blooming lotuses.
   His hands, legs, and mouth are as sweet as fruits
   and his handsome body is like the petals of a red lotus."
   3742 tirumēṉi aṭikaḷukkut tīviṉaiyēṉ viṭu tūtāy
   tirumūḻikkaḷam eṉṉum ceḻu nakarvāy aṇi mukilkāḷ
   tirumēṉi avaṭku aruḷīr eṉṟakkāl ummait taṉ
   tirumēṉi oḷi akaṟṟi teḷi vicumpu kaṭiyumē? (4)
   3742. She says,
   "O lovely clouds!
   You live in lovely Thirumuzhikkaḷam, a flourishing place.
   I have done so much bad karma.
   If you go as my messengers to the divine lord
   and tell him, ‘Give yourself to her,’
   are you worried that he will remove the brightness of your body
   and chase you away from the clear sky?"
   3743 teḷi vicumpu kaṭitu ōṭi tī vaḷaittu miṉ ilakum
   oḷi mukilkāḷ tirumūḻikkaḷattu uṟaiyum oṇcuṭarkku
   teḷi vicumpu tirunāṭāt tīviṉaiyēṉ maṉattu uṟaiyum
   tuḷi vār kaḷ kuḻalārkku eṉ tūtu uraittal ceppumiṉē (5)
   3743. She says, "O bright clouds,
   you make fire-like lightning
   and move swiftly across the clear sky.
   I have done bad karma.
   Go as my messengers to the god of Thirumuzhikkalam
   who shines like bright light and has curly hair
   decorated with flowers dripping with honey
   and tell him that I keep him always in my heart
   and think of it as the divine heaven of the lord."
   3744 tūtu uraittal ceppumiṉkaḷ tū moḻi vāy vaṇṭu iṉaṅkāḷ
   pōtu iraittu matu nukarum poḻil mūḻikkaḷattu uṟaiyum
   mātarait tam mārvakattē vaittārkku eṉ vāy māṟṟam
   tūtu uraittal cepputirēl cuṭar vaḷaiyum kalaiyumē (6)
   3744. She says,
   "O bees, the lord has the goddess Lakshmi on his chest.
   Go and tell my message beautifully
   to the god of Thirumuzhikkaḷam surrounded by groves
   where you spill pollen from the flowers
   and sing and drink honey from the blossoms.
   Go and tell him that my shining bangles
   and my waistband are becoming loose."
   3745 cuṭar vaḷaiyum kalaiyum koṇṭu aruviṉaiyēṉ tōḷ tuṟanta
   paṭar pukaḻāṉ tirumūḻikkaḷattu uṟaiyum paṅkayakkaṇ
   cuṭar pavaḷa vāyaṉaik kaṇṭu orunāḷ ōr tūy māṟṟam
   paṭar poḻilvāyk kuruku iṉaṅkāḷ eṉakku oṉṟu paṇiyīrē. (7)
   3745. She says,
   "O kurugu birds, you stay in the large groves!
   I have done bad karma.
   The famous lord of Thirumuzhikkaḷam with lotus eyes
   and a mouth shining like coral embraced my arms,
   took my bangles and waistband and left me.
   Go to him as my messengers and tell him of my love
   and then come back and tell me
   the faultless answer he gave to you."
   3746 eṉakku oṉṟu paṇiyīrkaḷ irum poḻilvāy irai tērntu
   maṉakku iṉpam paṭa mēvum vaṇṭu iṉaṅkāḷ tumpikāḷ
   kaṉakkoḷ tiṇ matiḷ puṭai cūḻ tirumūḻikkaḷattu uṟaiyum
   puṉakkoḷ kāyā mēṉip pūn tuḻāy muṭiyārkkē (8)
   3746. She says,
   "O male and female bees! O thumbi birds!
   You search for your food in the large groves
   and wander with happy hearts, joined together as couples.
   His body is as dark as the kaayam flowers blooming in the forest
   and he wears a beautiful thulasi garland in his hair.
   Go and tell the god of Thirumuzhikaḷam
   surrounded by strong walls how I suffer from love for him."
   3747 pūn tuḻāy muṭiyārkku poṉ āḻik kaiyārukku
   ēntu nīr iḷam kurukē tirumūḻik kaḷattārukku
   ēntu pūṇ mulai payantu eṉ iṇai malark kaṇ nīr tatumpa
   tām tammaikkoṇṭu akaltal takavu aṉṟu eṉṟu uraiyīrē (9)
   3747. She says, "O young kurugu bird!
   You live in a pond filled with water.
   The god of Thirumuzhikkaḷam carries a golden discus
   and wears a beautiful thulasi garland in his hair.
   Go and say to him,
   ‘Her round ornamented breasts have become pale.
   Her flower-like eyes are filled with tears.
   It isn’t fair that you loved her and left her.’"
   3748 takavu aṉṟu eṉṟu uraiyīrkaḷ taṭam puṉalvāy irai tērntu
   mika iṉpam paṭa mēvum mēl naṭaiya aṉṉaṅkāḷ
   mika mēṉi melivu eyti mēkalaiyum īṭu aḻintu eṉ
   akamēṉi oḻiyāmē tirumūḻikkaḷattārkkē (10)
   3748. She says, "O swans,
   you search for your food on the wide shores of the water
   and walk gently with your beloved flock and are happy.
   Go and tell the lord of Thirumuzhikkaḷam
   that she is weak and her waistband has grown loose.
   Her body is barely alive.
   It is not fair that you loved her and left her."
   3749 oḻivu iṉṟit tirumūḻikkaḷattu uṟaiyum oṇcuṭarai
   oḻivu illā aṇi maḻalaik kiḷimoḻiyāḷ alaṟṟiya col
   vaḻu illā vaṇ kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ vāyntu uraitta
   aḻivu illā āyirattu ip pattum nōy aṟukkumē (11)
   3749. Saḍagopan from faultless flourishing Thirukuruhur
   composed a thousand eternal pasurams
   describing a girl who loves the god and prattles on like a parrot,
   continually uttering sweet words and praising the lord
   of everlasting Thirumuzhikkaḷam.
   If devotees learn and recite these ten pasurams,
   their sickness will go away.
   -------------
   tiruvāymoḻi oṉpatām pattu (eṭṭām tirumoḻi, 3750-3760)
   tūtar mīḷumaḷavum taṉimai poṟāta talaivi talaivaṉ nakarāṉa
   tirunāvāy cella niṉaittal (tirunāvāy)
   3750 aṟukkum viṉaiyāyiṉa ākattu avaṉai
   niṟuttum maṉattu oṉṟiya cintaiyiṉārkku
   veṟit taṇ malarc cōlaikaḷ cūḻ tirunāvāy
   kuṟukkum vakai uṇṭukolō koṭiyēṟkē? (1)
   3750. If devotees keep the lord in their minds
   and think only of him their karma will go away.
   When will the day come when I, so unworthy,
   can approach Thirunavay,
   surrounded by fragrant cool blooming groves.
   3751 koṭi ēr iṭaik kōkaṉakattavaḷ kēḷvaṉ
   vaṭi vēl taṭam kaṇ maṭap piṉṉai maṇāḷaṉ
   neṭiyāṉ uṟai cōlaikaḷ cūḻ tirunāvāy
   aṭiyēṉ aṇukappeṟum nāḷ evaikolō? (2)
   3751. He is the beloved of Lakshmi staying on a lotus,
   her waist as thin as a vine,
   and the beloved of lovely Nappinnai
   with large sharp spear-like eyes.
   When will I, his slave, approach Thirunaavaay
   where the lord Nediyaan stays, surrounded by groves?
   3752 evaikol aṇukap peṟum nāḷ eṉṟu eppōtum
   kavaiyil maṉam iṉṟi kaṇṇīrkaḷ kaluḻvaṉ
   navai il tirunāraṇaṉ cēr tirunāvāy
   avaiyuḷ pukalāvatu ōr nāḷ aṟiyēṉē (3)
   3752. I think always in my faultless mind,
   "When will the day come that I go to the god?"
   and I shed tears and suffer.
   I don’t know when I will go
   to the faultless divine Naraṇan
   of Thirunaavaay.
   3753 nāḷēl aṟiyēṉ eṉakku uḷḷaṉa nāṉum
   mīḷā aṭimaippaṇi ceyyap pukuntēṉ
   nīḷ ār malarc cōlaikaḷ cūḻ tirunāvāy
   vāḷ ēy taṭam kaṇ maṭap piṉṉai maṇāḷā (4)
   3753. O god, you are the beloved of lovely Nappinnai
   with large sword-like eyes and you stay in Thirunaavaay
   surrounded by tall blooming groves.
   I have begun to serve you and do not want to leave you.
   I don’t know how long my life will be.
   3754 maṇāḷaṉ malar maṅkaikkum maṇ maṭantaikkum
   kaṇṇāḷaṉ ulakattu uyir tēvarkaṭku ellām
   viṇṇāḷaṉ virumpi uṟaiyum tirunāvāy
   kaṇ ārak kaḷikkiṉṟatu iṅku eṉṟukol kaṇṭē? (5)
   3754. He is the beloved of Lakshmi, on a lotus.
   He is as precious as her eyes to the earth goddess.
   He is the soul of all the creatures of the world
   and the god of the gods in the sky.
   He loves to stay in Thirunaavaay—
   when will the day come that I can go to him
   and my eyes can have the joy of seeing him?
   3755 kaṇṭē kaḷikkiṉṟatu iṅku eṉṟukol kaṇkaḷ
   toṇṭē uṉakkāy oḻintēṉ turicu iṉṟi
   vaṇṭu ār malarc cōlaikaḷ cūḻ tirunāvāy
   koṇṭē uṟaikiṉṟa em kōvalar kōvē? (6)
   3755. My eyes see you here and are happy.
   I became a faultless devotee to serve you.
   You stay in Thirunaavaay
   surrounded with blooming groves
   where the bees sing.
   You are the lord of the cowherds.
   3756 kō ākiya mā valiyai nilam koṇṭāy
   tēvācuram ceṟṟavaṉē tirumālē
   nāvāy uṟaikiṉṟa eṉ nāraṇa nampī
   āā aṭiyāṉ ivaṉ eṉṟu aruḷāyē (7)
   3756. As a dwarf you took the land from king Mahabali.
   You destroyed the Asurans when the gods fought them.
   You are Thirumaal.
   You are the Nambi Narayaṇan of Thirunaavaay.
   Come to me, give me your grace and say,
   "This is my devotee!"
   3757 aruḷātu oḻivāy aruḷ ceytu aṭiyēṉaip
   poruḷākki uṉ poṉ aṭik kīḻp puka vaippāy
   maruḷē iṉṟi uṉṉai eṉ neñcattu iruttum
   teruḷē taru teṉ tirunāvāy eṉ tēvē (8)
   3757. Whether you give me your grace or not,
   make me your devotee and let me stay beneath your golden feet.
   Give me a clear mind
   so I may keep you in my heart and not be confused.
   You are my god of Thirunaavaay.
   3758 tēvar muṉivarkku eṉṟum kāṇṭaṟku ariyaṉ
   mūvar mutalvaṉ oru mūvulaku āḷi
   tēvaṉ virumpi uṟaiyum tirunāvāy
   yāvar aṇukap peṟuvār iṉi? antō (9)
   3758 The gods and the sages could not see him.
   He is the ancient one of the three gods.
   He is the ruler of all the three worlds.
   Thirunaavaay is the place where the god loves to stay.
   How can we go and see the god?
   It is a pity!
   3759 antō aṇukap peṟum nāḷ eṉṟu eppōtum
   cintai kalaṅkit tirumāl eṉṟu aḻaippaṉ
   kontu ār malarc cōlaikaḷ cūḻ tirunāvāy
   vantē uṟaikiṉṟa em mā maṇi vaṇṇā. (10)
   3759. I suffer in my mind and call you, saying, "O Thirumaal!"
   and I ask you when the day will come when I can come to you.
   You have the color of a beautiful dark jewel
   and you stay in Thirunaavaay
   where the groves bloom with bunches of flowers.
   3760 vaṇṇam maṇi māṭa nal nāvāy uḷḷāṉait
   tiṇṇam matiḷ teṉ kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ
   paṇ ār tamiḻ āyirattu ip pattum vallār
   maṇ āṇṭu maṇam kamaḻvar mallikaiyē (11)
   3760. Saḍagopan of flourishing southern Thirukuruhur
   filled with palaces studded with precious jewels
   and surrounded by strong walls
   composed a thousand musical Tamil pasurams.
   If devotees learn and recite these ten poems
   they will rule the earth for many years
   and their fame will spread like the fragrance of jasmine.
   ------------
   tiruvāymoḻi oṉpatām pattu (oṉpatām tirumoḻi, 3761-3771)
   talaivi mālaippoḻutu kaṇṭu taṉatu āṟṟāmaiyāl iraṅkik kūṟal
   3761 mallikai kamaḻ teṉṟal īrum ālō
   vaṇ kuṟiñci icai tavarum ālō
   cel katir mālaiyum mayakkum ālō
   cekkar nal mēkaṅkaḷ citaikkum ālō
   alli am tāmaraik kaṇṇaṉ emmāṉ
   āyarkaḷ ēṟu ari ēṟu em māyōṉ
   pulliya mulaikaḷum tōḷum koṇṭu
   pukaliṭam aṟikilam tamiyam ālō (1)
   3761. She says,
   "The breeze with its fragrance of jasmine
   increases the pain of my love.
   The beautiful Kurunji music hurts my ears.
   The evening when the sun sets with red rays makes me dizzy.
   The beautiful red clouds kill me.
   My dear lotus-eyed Kaṇṇan, the bull among the cowherds,
   the Maayon, the heroic lion, embraced my breasts and arms.
   Now I am lonely and do not know where I will find refuge."
   3762 pukaliṭam aṟikilam tamiyam ālō
   pulampuṟu maṇi teṉṟal āmpal ālō
   pakal aṭu mālai vaṇ cāntam ālō
   pañcamam mullai taṇ vāṭai ālō
   akal iṭam paṭaittu iṭantu uṇṭu umiḻntu
   aḷantu eṅkum aḷikkiṉṟa āyaṉ māyōṉ
   ikaliṭattu acurarkaḷ kūṟṟam vārāṉ
   iṉi iruntu eṉ uyir kākkum āṟu eṉ? (2)
   3762. She says,
   "I am lonely and I do not know where I will find refuge.
   The lovely breeze makes me prattle and suffer.
   The evening when the sun sets
   and cooling sandal paste both make me hot.
   The music of the panchama raga
   and the fragrance of jasmine make me suffer.
   Maayon, the cowherd, created this wide world,
   split it open when he took the form of a boar,
   swallowed it, spit it out and measured it.
   He gives his grace to all.
   When the Asurans come to fight with him he is Yama for them.
   He doesn’t come to see me. Why do I keep on living?"
   3763 iṉi iruntu eṉ uyir kākkum āṟu eṉ?
   iṇai mulai namuka nuṇ iṭai nuṭaṅka
   tuṉi irum kalaviceytu ākam tōyntu
   tuṟantu emmai iṭṭu akal kaṇṇaṉ kaḷvaṉ
   taṉi iḷam ciṅkam em māyaṉ vārāṉ
   tāmaraik kaṇṇum cevvāyum nīlap
   paṉi irum kuḻalkaḷum nāṉku tōḷum
   pāviyēṉ maṉattē niṉṟu īrum ālō (3)
   3763. She says,
   "Why do I keep on living?
   The thief Kaṇṇan embraced my chest,
   pressing my breasts and making my small waist tremble.
   He loved me dearly and left me.
   A young lion, he, Maayan, does not return.
   His lotus eyes, red mouth, dark handsome hair
   and his four arms stay in my mind and make me suffer.
   I am pitiful."
   3764 pāviyēṉ maṉattē niṉṟu īrum ālō
   vāṭai taṇ vāṭai vev vāṭai ālō
   mēvu taṇ matiyam vem matiyam ālō
   meṉ malarp paḷḷi vem paḷḷi ālō
   tūvi am puḷ uṭait teyva vaṇṭu
   tutainta em peṇmai am pū itu ālō
   āviyiṉ param alla vakaikaḷ ālō
   yāmuṭai neñcamum tuṇai aṉṟu ālō (4)
   3764. She says,
   "All his forms stay in my mind and give me pain.
   The cool wind blows and makes me hot.
   The cool moon rises and is hot for me.
   My bed, spread with soft flowers, is hot.
   He came and took my chastity
   like a divine bee with pure wings that loves flowers.
   My life is not in my hands.
   My heart does not help me and makes me suffer."
   3765 yāmuṭai neñcamum tuṇai aṉṟu ālō
   ā puku mālaiyum ākiṉṟu ālō
   yāmuṭai āyaṉ taṉ maṉam kal ālō
   avaṉuṭait tīm kuḻal īrum ālō
   yāmuṭait tuṇai eṉṉum tōḻimārum
   emmil muṉ avaṉukku māyvar ālō
   yāmuṭai ār uyir kākkumāṟu eṉ?
   avaṉuṭai aruḷpeṟum pōtu aritē (5)
   3765. She says,
   "My heart does not help me, it only troubles me.
   The evening when the cows return home is painful for me.
   Is the heart of the cowherd I love a stone?
   The sweet music of his flute hurts me.
   My friends are my only help and they worry for me.
   How can I protect my dear life?
   It is hard to receive his grace
   but that is be the only thing that will help me."
   3766 avaṉuṭai aruḷpeṟum pōtu aritāl
   av aruḷ allaṉa aruḷum alla
   avaṉ aruḷ peṟum aḷavu āvi nillātu
   aṭu pakal mālaiyum neñcum kāṇēṉ
   civaṉoṭu piramaṉ vaṇ tirumaṭantai
   cēr tiru ākam em āvi īrum
   evaṉ iṉip pukum iṭam? evaṉ ceykēṉō?
   ārukku eṉ collukēṉ? aṉṉaimīrkāḷ (6)
   3766. She says,
   " It is hard to get his grace.
   Any other grace but his is not really grace.
   Unless I receive his grace my soul will not join him.
   My heart cannot bear the hot sun and the evening.
   His divine body where Shiva, Brahma
   and the beautiful Lakshmi stay attracts my life.
   O mothers, where will I go to find a refuge?
   What should I do?
   To whom should I tell my pain?"
   3767 ārukku eṉ collukēṉ? aṉṉaimīrkāḷ
   ār uyir aḷavu aṉṟu ik kūr taṇ vāṭai
   kār okkum mēṉi nam kaṇṇaṉ kaḷvam
   kavarnta at taṉi neñcam avaṉ kaṇaḵtē
   cīr uṟṟa akil pukai yāḻ narampu
   pañcamam taṇ pacum cāntu aṇaintu
   pōr uṟṟa vāṭai taṇ mallikaippūp
   putu maṇam mukantukoṇṭu eṟiyum ālō (7)
   3767. She says,
   "O mothers, to whom can I tell how I suffer from love?
   What should I say? My life is almost over.
   The dark cloud-colored Kaṇṇan
   has captured my dear heart and it has gone to him.
   The breeze that carries fresh fragrance
   with the the smoke of incense sticks,
   the panchamam music from the yaaz,
   the fragrance of cool fresh sandal paste,
   the smell of beautiful jasmine—
   all come and seem to fight me."
   3768 putu maṇam mukantu koṇṭu eṟiyum ālō
   poṅku iḷa vāṭai puṉ cekkar ālō
   atu maṇantu akaṉṟa nam kaṇṇaṉ kaḷvam
   kaṇṇaṉil koṭitu iṉi ataṉil umpar
   matu maṇa mallikai mantak kōvai
   vaṇ pacum cāntiṉil pañcamam vaittu
   atu maṇantu iṉ aruḷ āycciyarkkē
   ūtum at tīm kuḻaṟkē uyyēṉ nāṉ (8)
   3768. She says,
   "The breeze carries fresh fragrance and overwhelms me.
   The cool young wind is like a red fire for me.
   Our Kaṇṇan came, loved us and left like a thief.
   His naughty deeds are terrible.
   The fragrance of new jasmine dripping with honey,
   the gentle breeze, sandal paste,
   music in the panchamam raga all make me suffer.
   That thief gives his grace
   and plays sweet music on his flute for the cowherd girls.
   I cannot hear it and survive."
   3769 ūtum at tīm kuḻaṟkē uyyēṉ nāṉ
   atu moḻintu iṭai iṭai taṉ cey kōlat
   tūtu cey kaṇkaḷ koṇṭu oṉṟu pēci
   tū moḻi icaikaḷ koṇṭu oṉṟu nōkki
   pētuṟu mukamceytu nontu nontu
   pētai neñcu aṟavu aṟap pāṭum pāṭṭai
   yātum oṉṟu aṟikilam amma amma
   mālaiyum vantatu māyaṉ vārāṉ (9)
   3769. She says,
   "I cannot hear that sweet music and survive.
   When he plays on his flute, he speaks to us as he plays.
   He send his eyes as messengers to say something to us.
   He plays his music as if he is talking to the cowherd girls.
   He makes many faces. I cannot imagine
   how much the cowherd girls’ innocent hearts have suffered.
   The evening has come but Maayan has not yet come."
   3770 mālaiyum vantatu māyaṉ vārāṉ
   mā maṇi pulampa val ēṟu aṇainta
   kōla nal nākukaḷ ukaḷum ālō
   koṭiyaṉa kuḻalkaḷum kuḻaṟum ālō
   vāl oḷi vaḷar mullai karumukaikaḷ
   mallikai alampi vaṇṭu ālum ālō
   vēlaiyum vicumpil viṇṭu alaṟum ālō
   eṉ colli uyvaṉ iṅku avaṉai viṭṭē? (10)
   3770. She says,
   "The evening has come but that Maayan has not.
   The bulls with their large bells have reached home.
   The beautiful cows that saw their bulls jump in joy have come.
   The music of the flute makes me prattle on.
   Bees sing and fly around thriving jasmine and mullai buds.
   The ocean looks at the sky and roars.
   He has left me.
   What can I say to survive now that he has left me?"
   3771 avaṉaiviṭṭu akaṉṟu uyir āṟṟakillā
   aṇi iḻai āycciyar mālaip pūcal
   avaṉai viṭṭu akalvataṟkē iraṅki
   aṇi kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ māṟaṉ
   avaṉi uṇṭu umiḻntavaṉmēl uraitta
   āyirattuḷ ivai pattum koṇṭu
   avaṉiyuḷ alaṟṟi niṉṟu uymmiṉ toṇṭīr
   ac coṉṉa mālai naṇṇit toḻutē (11)
   3771. Saḍagopan Maaṛan of beautiful Thirukuruhur
   composed a thousand pasurams on the god
   who swallowed all the seven worlds and spit them out,
   describing how the cowherd girls felt sad when he left them.
   Ornamented with beautiful jewels,
   they could not bear separation from Kaṇṇan
   and felt they could not live.
   O devotees, learn these ten pasurams, recite them
   and worship him and you will be saved.
   --------------
   tiruvāymoḻi oṉpatām pattu (pattām tirumoḻi, 3772-3782)
   tirukkaṇṇapuram cērumāṟu piṟarukku upatēcam ceytal (tirukkaṇṇapuram)
   3772 mālai naṇṇit toḻutu eḻumiṉō viṉai keṭa
   kālai mālai kamala malar iṭṭu nīr
   vēlai mōtum matiḷ cūḻ tiruk kaṇṇapurattu
   āliṉmēl āl amarntāṉ aṭi iṇaikaḷē (1)
   3772. Worship in the evening to remove
   the results of your karma.
   In the morning and evening place lotus flowers
   at the feet of the god and worship him.
   He slept on a banyan leaf
   and he is the god of Thirukkaṇṇapuram
   surrounded with walls
   where the ocean waves come and break.
   3773 kaḷ aviḻum malar iṭṭu nīr iṟaiñcumiṉ
   naḷḷi cērum vayal cūḻ kiṭaṅkiṉ puṭai
   veḷḷi ēynta matiḷ cūḻ tiruk kaṇṇapuram
   uḷḷi nāḷum toḻutu eḻumiṉō toṇṭarē (2)
   3773. Worship the god with flowers dripping with honey.
   O devotees, every morning when you get up
   worship the feet of the god of Thirukaṇṇapuram
   surrounded by tall walls that touch the stars
   where crabs swim in the water in the fields.
   3774 toṇṭar num tam tuyar pōka nīr ēkamāy
   viṇṭu vāṭā malar iṭṭu nīr iṟaiñcumiṉ
   vaṇṭu pāṭum poḻil cūḻ tirukkaṇṇapurattu
   aṇṭa vāṇaṉ amarar perumāṉaiyē (3)
   3774. O devotees, pour water,
   place fresh blooming flowers at the feet of the god
   and worship him and he will remove your sorrows.
   He is the god of the gods of Thirukkaṇṇapuram
   surrounded by groves where bees sing.
   3775 māṉai nōkki maṭap piṉṉai taṉ kēḷvaṉai
   tēṉai vāṭā malar iṭṭu nīr iṟaiñcumiṉ
   vāṉai untum matiḷ cūḻ tirukkaṇṇapuram
   tāṉ nayanta perumāṉ caraṇ ākumē (4)
   3775. He is the beloved of the beautiful doe-eyed Nappinai.
   He is as sweet as honey—worship him,
   pouring water and placing fresh flowers at this feet.
   He is the god of Thirukkaṇṇapuram
   surrounded by walls that reach the sky.
   He loves to stay in Thirukannapuram
   and his feet are the refuge for all his devotees.
   3776 caraṇam ākum taṉa tāḷ aṭaintārkku ellām
   maraṇam āṉāl vaikuntam koṭukkum pirāṉ
   araṇ amainta matiḷ cūḻ tirukkaṇṇapurat
   taraṇiyāḷaṉ taṉatu aṉparkku aṉpu ākumē (5)
   3776. He loves all devotees who approach his feet.
   He gives moksha in Vaikuṇḍam to them
   when they leave this world.
   He is the god of Thirukannapuram
   surrounded with strong fort-like walls.
   He is the friend of those who love him.
   3777 aṉpaṉ ākum taṉa tāḷ aṭaintārkku ellām
   cem poṉ ākattu avuṇaṉ uṭal kīṇṭavaṉ
   naṉ poṉ ēynta matiḷ cūḻ tirukkaṇṇapurattu
   aṉpaṉ nāḷum taṉa meyyarkku meyyaṉē (6)
   3777. If devotees approach his feet, he becomes their friend.
   He split open the chest of the Asuran Hiranyan
   that was as strong as pure gold.
   He is a dear friend and he is the god in Thirukkaṇṇapuram
   surrounded by shining walls covered with gold.
   If devotees believe in him, he is real for them.
   3778 meyyaṉ ākum virumpit toḻuvārkku ellām
   poyyaṉ ākum puṟamē toḻuvārkku ellām
   ceyyil vāḷai ukaḷum tirukkaṇṇapurattu
   aiyaṉ ākattu aṇaippārkaṭku aṇiyaṉē (7)
   3778. If devotees believe in him and worship him,
   he is real for them.
   If anyone worships him without true devotion,
   he is not real for them.
   The god of Thirukaṇṇapuram
   where vaalai fish frolic in the fields
   is near to those who embrace him in their hearts.
   3779 aṇiyaṉ ākum taṉa tāḷ aṭaintārkku ellām
   piṇiyum cārā piṟavi keṭuttu āḷum
   maṇi poṉ ēynta matiḷ cūḻ tirukkaṇṇaram
   paṇimiṉ nāḷum paramēṭṭi taṉ pātamē (8)
   3779. If devotees approach his feet every day
   he will remove their sicknesses
   and give his grace so they will not be born again.
   Bow to the feet of the highest lord of heaven
   of Thirukkaṇṇapuram
   surrounded by walls studded with precious stones
   and covered with gold.
   3780 pātam nāḷum paṇiya taṇiyum piṇi
   ētam cārā eṉakkēl iṉi eṉkuṟai?
   vēta nāvar virumpum tirukkaṇṇapurattu
   ātiyāṉai aṭaintārkku allal illaiyē (9)
   3780. Your sicknesses will go away if you worship
   the feet of the lord every day.
   I will not have trouble in my life.
   There is nothing for me to worry about.
   People will have no trouble
   if they have taken refuge in the ancient lord
   of Thirukaṇṇapuram where the Brahmins
   recite the Vedas and live happily.
   3781 illai allal eṉakkēl iṉi eṉ kuṟai?
   alli mātar amarum tirumārpiṉaṉ
   kallil ēynta matiḷ cūḻ tirukkaṇṇapuram
   colla nāḷum tuyar pāṭu cārāvē (10)
   3781. I will have no trouble in my life.
   There is nothing for me to worry about.
   Lakshmi abides on a lotus and stays on his chest.
   If devotees every day praise Thirukkaṇṇapuram
   surrounded by stone walls
   they will have no trouble in their lives.
   3782 pāṭu cārāviṉai paṟṟu aṟa vēṇṭuvīr
   māṭam nīṭu kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ col
   pāṭalāṉa tamiḻ āyirattuḷ ippattum
   pāṭi āṭip paṇimiṉ avaṉ tāḷkaḷē (11)
   3782. Saḍagopan from Thirukuruhur filled with tall palaces
   composed a thousand Tamil pasurams.
   If you want to be without trouble and remove your karma
   sing these ten pasurams
   and dance and worship his feet.
   -------------
                     ___________________________________

                  tiruvāymoḻi pattām pattu (3783-3892)
         Divyaprabandham -Thiruvaymozhi - Pattaam Pathu 3783 - 3892

   tiruvāymoḻi pattām pattu (mutal tirumoḻi, 3783-3793)
   tirumōkūrp perumāṉaic caraṇam aṭaintu tām paramapatam
   aṭaiyak karutiyatai āḻvār aruḷicceytal (tirumōkūr)
   3783 tāḷa tāmarait taṭam aṇi vayal tirumōkūr
   nāḷum mēvi naṉku amarntu niṉṟu acurarait takarkkum
   tōḷum nāṉku uṭaic curi kuḻal kamalak kaṇ kaṉi vāyk
   kāḷamēkattai aṉṟi maṟṟoṉṟu ilam katiyē (1)
   3783. He has the color of a dark cloud,
   a mouth sweet as a fruit, lotus eyes, curly hair and four arms.
   He destroys the Asurans.
   He stays happily always in Thirumogur
   surrounded by flourishing fields and ponds
   blooming with lotuses on stalks.
   I have no refuge but the dark cloud-colored god.
   3784 ilam kati maṟṟoṉṟu emmaikkum īṉ taṇ tuḻāyiṉ
   alaṅkal am kaṇṇi āyiram pēr uṭai ammāṉ
   nalam koḷ nāṉmaṟai vāṇarkaḷ vāḻ tirumōkūr
   nalam kaḻal avaṉ aṭi niḻal taṭam aṉṟi yāmē (2)
   3784. My father, the god, has a thousand names
   and is adorned with a cool thulasi garland and precious ornaments.
   He is my only refuge for all my births.
   There is no help for me except the shadow of his feet
   ornamented with sounding anklets.
   He is the god of Thirumogur where Brahmins live
   who know all the good four Vedas.
   3785 aṉṟi yām oru pukaliṭam ilam eṉṟu eṉṟu alaṟṟi
   niṉṟu nāṉmukaṉ araṉoṭu tēvarkaḷ nāṭa
   veṉṟu im mūvulaku aḷittu uḻalvāṉ tirumōkūr
   naṉṟu nām iṉi naṇukutum namatu iṭar keṭavē (3)
   3785. Nanmuhan, Shiva and the other gods
   came to you and stood before you crying,
   "We have no refuge!"
   He, the god of divine Thirumogur, fought
   and conquered all the enemies of the gods
   and protected the three worlds and saved them.
   We will go to Thirumogur
   and our troubles will be removed.
   3786 iṭar keṭa emmaip pōntu aḷiyāy eṉṟu eṉṟu ētti
   cuṭar koḷ cōtiyait tēvarum muṉivarum toṭara
   paṭar koḷ pāmpu aṇaip paḷḷi koḷvāṉ tirumōkūr
   iṭar keṭa aṭi paravutum toṇṭīr! vammiṉē (4)
   3786. The gods and sages went to the lord
   shining as a bright light and praised him, saying,
   "Give us your grace and remove our troubles!"
   and he removed their troubles.
   O devotees, come,
   our god sleeps on the snake bed in Thirmogur.
   Let us go there and worship him
   and our troubles will go away.
   3787 toṇṭīr vammiṉ nam cuṭar oḷi oru taṉi mutalvaṉ
   aṇṭam mūvulaku aḷantavaṉ aṇi tirumōkūr
   eṇ ticaiyum īṉ karumpoṭu perum cennel viḷaiyak
   koṇṭa kōyilai valañceytu iṅku āṭutum kūttē (5)
   3787. O devotees, come.
   He, the first ancient lord, shining like a bright light,
   measured all the three worlds and the sky.
   He is the god of the temple in beautiful Thirumogur
   where abundant sugarcane and good paddy grow.
   Let us go there, circle the temple,
   worship the lord and dance the kuthu dance.
   3788 kūttaṉ kōvalaṉ kutaṟṟu val acurarkaḷ kūṟṟam
   ēttum naṅkaṭkum amararkkum muṉivarkkum iṉpaṉ
   vāytta taṇ paṇai vaḷa vayal cūḻ tirumōkūr
   āttaṉ tāmarai aṭi aṉṟi maṟṟu ilam araṇē (6)
   3788. He dances the kuthu dance.
   He grazes the cows.
   He is Yama for the Asurans and destroys them all.
   He is a joy for sages, gods and those who praise him.
   He is the god of Thirumogur surrounded
   with flourishing cool fields and water ponds.
   There is no protection except the lotus feet of the god, the friend of
   all.
   3789 maṟṟu ilam araṇ vāṉ perum pāḻ taṉi mutalāc
   cuṟṟum nīr paṭaittu ataṉ vaḻit tol muṉi mutalā
   muṟṟum tēvarōṭu ulakuceyvāṉ tirumōkūr
   cuṟṟi nām valañ ceyya nam tuyar keṭum kaṭitē (7)
   3789. We have no protection but him.
   He created the sky, the wide worlds
   and the oceans around them.
   He created the ancient sages and other gods.
   He, the creator of all the world,
   stays in beautiful divine Thirumogur.
   If we go there and circle the temple
   all our troubles will swiftly disappear.
   3790 tuyar keṭum kaṭitu aṭaintu vantu aṭiyavar toḻumiṉ
   uyar koḷ cōlai oṇ taṭam aṇi oḷi tirumōkūr
   peyarkaḷ āyiram uṭaiya val arakkar pukku aḻunta
   tayarataṉ peṟṟa marakata maṇit taṭattiṉaiyē (8)
   3790. O devotees, come and worship him
   and all your troubles will swiftly disappear.
   He has a thousand names.
   He destroys the strong Asurans.
   Worship the son of Dasarathan
   shining like a precious emerald
   of beautiful Thirumogur
   surrounded by rich ponds and tall groves.
   3791 maṇit taṭattu aṭi malark kaṇkaḷ pavaḷac cevvāy
   aṇik koḷ nāl taṭam tōḷ teyvam acurarai eṉṟum
   tuṇikkum val araṭṭaṉ uṟai poḻil tirumōkūr
   naṇittu nammuṭai nal araṇ nām aṭaintaṉamē (9)
   3791. The divine god, the king, has beautiful feet,
   lotus eyes, a mouth red as coral
   and four large ornamented arms.
   He destroyed the strong Asurans.
   Thirumogur surrounded by blooming groves is near.
   Let us go there and gain good protection.
   3792 nām aṭainta nal araṇ namakku eṉṟu nal amarar
   tīmai ceyyum val acurarai añcic ceṉṟu aṭaintāl
   kāma rūpam koṇṭu eḻuntu aḷippāṉ tirumōkūr
   nāmamē naviṉṟu eṇṇumiṉ ēttumiṉ namarkāḷ (10)
   3792. O devotees,
   when the Asurans afflicted the gods with troubles
   they were afraid, went to our lord and asked for help.
   He took any form that he desired and showed them his grace.
   Think only of the many names of the god
   of Thirumogur, recite them and praise him.
   3793 ēttumiṉ namarkāḷ eṉṟu tāṉ kuṭam āṭu
   kūttaṉaik kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ kuṟṟēvalkaḷ
   vāytta āyirattuḷ ivai vaṇ tirumōkūrkku
   ītta pattu ivai ētta vallārkku iṭar keṭumē (11)
   3793. Saḍagopan of Thirukuruhur
   composed a thousand pasurams
   on the lord who danced on a pot, saying ,
   "O devotees, praise him!"
   Those who are able to recite these ten pasurams
   on the god of flourishing Thirumogur
   will have no trouble in their lives.
   ----------
   tiruvāymoḻi pattām pattu (iraṇṭām tirumoḻi, 3794-3804)
   tiruvaṉantapurattaic cērntāl paramapatattiṟ pōlat toṇṭu
   ceyyalām eṉṟu kūṟutal (tiruvaṉantapuram)
   3794 keṭum iṭar āya ellām kēcavā eṉṉa nāḷum
   koṭuviṉai ceyyum kūṟṟiṉ tamarkaḷum kuṟukakillār
   viṭam uṭai aravil paḷḷi virumpiṉāṉ curumpu alaṟṟum
   taṭam uṭai vayal aṉantapuranakar pukutum iṉṟē (1)
   3794. If you say, "Kesavan!" all your troubles will disappear.
   The cruel messengers of Yama will not be able to approach you.
   Today itself let us go to Anandapuram surrounded by fields
   and ponds where surumbu bees sing.
   Let us praise Maayan, our god who likes to sleep on the snake bed.
   3795 iṉṟu pōyp pukutirākil eḻumaiyum ētam cārā
   kuṉṟu nēr māṭam māṭē kuruntu cēr cerunti puṉṉai
   maṉṟu alar poḻil aṉantapuranakar māyaṉ nāmam
   oṉṟum ōr āyiramām uḷḷuvārkku umpar ūrē (2)
   3795. If you go to Anandapuram
   you will have no trouble for all your seven births.
   It is a place filled with mountain-like palaces and groves
   where kurundu, cherundi and punnai flowers bloom in the courtyards.
   If devotees think of even one of the thousand names
   of the god Maayan of that place they will reach the gods’ world.
   3796 ūrum puḷ koṭiyum aḵtē ulaku ellām uṇṭu umiḻntāṉ
   cērum taṇ aṉantapuram cikkeṉap pukutirākil
   tīrum nōy viṉaikaḷ ellām tiṇṇam nām aṟiyac coṉṉōm
   pērum ōr āyirattuḷ oṉṟu nīr pēcumiṉē (3)
   3796. He rides on a eagle and carries an eagle flag
   and he swallowed all the worlds and spat them out.
   If you go to rich Anandapuram at once and worship the god
   all the troubles from your bad karma will disappear.
   I want you to realize that this is certain.
   Praise one of the thousand names of the lord.
   3797 pēcumiṉ kūcam iṉṟi periya nīr vēlai cūḻntu
   vācamē kamaḻum cōlai vayal aṇi aṉantapuram
   nēcam ceytu uṟaikiṉṟāṉai neṟimaiyāl malarkaḷ tūvi
   pūcaṉai ceykiṉṟārkaḷ puṇṇiyam ceytavāṟē (4)
   3797. The devotees with much good karma
   sprinkle flowers and, without holding back, worship
   the god of beautiful Anandapuram
   surrounded with fields and fragrant groves
   and the ocean with its abundant water.
   3798 puṇṇiyam ceytu nalla puṉaloṭu malarkaḷ tūvi
   eṇṇumiṉ entai nāmam ip piṟappu aṟukkum appāl
   tiṇṇam nām aṟiyac coṉṉōm ceṟi poḻil aṉantapurattu
   aṇṇalār kamala pātam aṇukuvār amarar āvār (5)
   3798. Do good karma, sprinkle flowers with good water
   and think of the names of our father.
   That will remove your births—this is certain.
   I am telling you so that you will know.
   If devotees approach and worship the lotus feet
   of the highest god of Anandapuram surrounded by thick groves,
   they will join the gods in the sky.
   3799 amararāyt tirikiṉṟārkaṭku āti cēr aṉantapurattu
   amarar kōṉ arccikkiṉṟu aṅku akap paṇi ceyvar viṇṇōr
   namarkaḷō collak kēḷmiṉ nāmum pōy naṇukavēṇṭum
   kumaraṉār tātai tuṉpam tuṭaitta kōvintaṉārē (6)
   3799. The king of the gods gives his grace
   in everlasting Anandapuram to the gods of the sky
   who have come there, wander and perform worship for the lord.
   O devotees, listen to what I say.
   We should go and approach Govindan.
   He took away the trouble of Shiva, the father of Kumaran.
   3800 tuṭaitta kōvintaṉārē ulaku uyir tēvum maṟṟum
   paṭaitta em parama mūrtti pāmpu aṇaip paḷḷi koṇṭāṉ
   maṭaittalai vāḷai pāyum vayal aṇi aṉantapuram
   kaṭaittalai cīykkappeṟṟāl kaṭuviṉai kaḷaiyalāmē (7)
   3800. Govindan removes the troubles of his devotees.
   The highest god sleeps on a snake bed
   and created all the creatures of the world and the gods.
   If we go and sweep the front of the temple
   in beautiful Anandapuram surrounded by fields
   where vaalai fish frolic in the streams
   all our bad karma will go away.
   3801 kaṭuviṉai kaḷaiyalākum kāmaṉaip payanta kāḷai
   iṭavakai koṇṭatu eṉpar eḻil aṇi aṉantapuram
   paṭam uṭai aravil paḷḷi payiṉṟavaṉ pātam kāṇa
   naṭamiṉō namarkaḷ uḷḷīr! nām umakku aṟiyac coṉṉōm. (8)
   3801. O devotees,
   go to see the feet of the strong bull-like god
   in beautiful Anandapuram where he sleeps on a snake bed
   and your bad karma will go away.
   It is the place of the god, the father of Kama.
   O devotees, I want you to know this.
   3802 nām umakku aṟiyac coṉṉa nāḷkaḷum naṇiya āṉa
   cēmam naṉku uṭaittuk kaṇṭīr ceṟi poḻil aṉantapuram
   tūmam nal virai malarkaḷ tuvaḷ aṟa āyntukoṇṭu
   vāmaṉaṉ aṭikku eṉṟu ētta māyntu aṟum viṉaikaḷ tāmē. (9)
   3802. Gather fresh fragrant flowers to sprinkle
   on the feet of our god Vamanan
   and put out incense and worship his feet.
   Go to Anandapuram surrounded by thick blooming groves
   and worship the lord.
   All your karma will go away.
   I have been saying this for a long time.
   There is only a little time left.
   3803 māyntu aṟum viṉaikaḷ tāmē mātavā eṉṉa nāḷum
   ēynta poṉ matiḷ aṉantapuranakar entaikku eṉṟu
   cāntoṭu viḷakkam tūpam tāmarai malarkaḷ nalla
   āyntu koṇṭu ētta vallār antam il pukaḻiṉārē (10)
   3803. If you worship every day saying,
   "Madhava!" your karma will be destroyed.
   Gather faultless lotus flowers, incense, sandal paste
   and lamps and take them to worship our father,
   the god of Anandapuram surrounded by golden walls.
   If devotees go there and worship the lord
   they will have endless fame.
   3804 antam il pukaḻ aṉantapuranakar āti taṉṉaik
   kontu alar poḻil kurukūr māṟaṉ col āyirattuḷ
   aintiṉōṭu aintum vallār aṇaivar pōy amar ulakil
   paintoṭi maṭantaiyar tam vēy maru tōḷ iṇaiyē (11)
   3804. Saḍagopan of Thirukurugur
   surrounded by groves with bunches of blooming flowers
   composed a thousand pasurams on the ancient god
   of Anandapuram that has endless fame.
   If devotees learn and recite these ten pasurams
   they will go to the world of the gods and enjoy women
   who have bamboo-like arms and beautiful bangles.
   ----------
   tiruvāymoḻi pattām pattu (mūṉṟām tirumoḻi, 3805-3815)
   ānirai mēykkac ceṉṟāl pirivāṟṟi irōm eṉṟu pōkkait
   tavirkkumāṟu āycciyar kaṇṇaṉai vēṇṭutal
   3805 vēy maru tōḷ iṇai meliyum ālō
   melivum eṉ taṉimaiyum yātum nōkkāk
   kāmaru kuyilkaḷum kūvum ālō
   kaṇa mayil avai kalantu ālum ālō
   ā maruvu iṉa nirai mēykka nī pōkku
   oru pakal āyiram ūḻi ālō
   tāmaraik kaṇkaḷkoṇṭu īrti ālō
   takavilai takavilaiyē nī kaṇṇā (1)
   3805. She says,
   "My bamboo-like arms have become thin.
   The lovely cuckoo birds keep on cooing.
   They do not understand
   how I have grown thin and how lonely I am.
   The beautiful peacocks hear the cuckoos and dance,
   yet you go to graze the cattle.
   For me one day passes like a thousand eons.
   You attract us with your lotus eyes.
   O Kaṇṇan, this is not fair, it isn’t fair."
   3806 takavilai takavilaiyē nī kaṇṇā
   taṭa mulai puṇartoṟum puṇarccikku ārāc
   cukaveḷḷam vicumpu iṟantu aṟivai mūḻkac
   cūḻntu atu kaṉavu eṉa nīṅki āṅkē
   aka uyir akam akamtōṟum uḷ pukku
   āviyiṉ param alla vēṭkai antō
   mika mika iṉi uṉṉaip pirivai āmāl
   vīva niṉ pacu nirai mēykkap pōkkē (2)
   3806. She says,
   "O Kaṇṇan, this is not fair, it isn’t fair.
   Whenever you embraced me my joy increased like a flood
   and I couldn’t think of anything.
   Afterwards, I felt it was only a dream.
   Joy entered my heart more and more,
   O god, it was more than the joy of entering moksha.
   When you go to graze the cows
   I cannot bear to be apart from you."
   3807 vīvaṉ niṉ pacu nirai mēykkap pōkku
   vevvuyir koṇṭu eṉatu āvi vēmāl
   yāvarum tuṇai illai yāṉ iruntu uṉ
   añcaṉa mēṉiyai āṭṭam kāṇēṉ
   pōvatu aṉṟu oru pakal nī akaṉṟāl
   poru kayal kaṇ iṇai nīrum nillā
   cāvatu iv āykkulattu āycciyōmāyp
   piṟanta it toḻuttaiyōm taṉimai tāṉē (3)
   3807. She says,
   "When you go to graze the cows you take my life with you.
   My heart burns and I have no help.
   I am here and cannot see your body that is dark as kohl.
   Even though you go for only one day I feel like it is an eon.
   The tears do not stop from my eyes, shaped like fighting fish.
   We were born as cowherd women and we are like slaves.
   We are lonely."
   3808 toḻuttaiyōm taṉimaiyum tuṇai pirintār
   tuyaramum niṉaikilai kōvintā niṉ
   toḻuttaṉil pacukkaḷaiyē virumpi
   tuṟantu emmai iṭṭu avai mēykkap pōti
   paḻutta nal amutiṉ iṉ cāṟṟu veḷḷam
   pāviyēṉ maṉam akamtōṟum uḷpukku
   aḻutta niṉ ceṅkaṉi vāyiṉ kaḷvap
   paṇimoḻi niṉaitoṟum āvi vēmāl (4)
   3808. She says,
   "O Govindan, we are lonely.
   We are separated from you and you don’t think of us.
   You like to graze the cows, taking them with you
   and leaving us here alone.
   Your words that are as sweet as ripe fruits
   enter my heart like a flood of juice flowing from those fruits.
   My heart burns when I think of the tender cheating words
   that come from your red mouth that is as sweet as nectar.
   I am pitiful."
   3809 paṇimoḻi niṉaitoṟum āvi vēmāl
   pakal nirai mēykkiya pōya kaṇṇā
   piṇi aviḻ mallikai vāṭai tūva
   peru mata mālaiyum vantiṉṟu ālō
   maṇi miku mārpiṉil mullaippōtu eṉ
   vaṉa mulai kamaḻvittu uṉ vāy amutam tantu
   aṇi miku tāmaraik kaiyai antō!
   aṭicciyōm talaimicai nī aṇiyāy (5)
   3809. She says,
   "Whenever I think of your sweet words my heart burns.
   O Kaṇṇan, you went out at daytime to graze the cows.
   The jasmine buds that bloom spread fragrance in the wind.
   The terrible evening that fights with me arrives.
   Come and embrace our beautiful breasts with your ornamented chest
   that spreads the jasmine smell of your garlands.
   Give us the nectar from your mouth.
   Put your lovely lotus hands on our heads to adorn them."
   3810 aṭicciyōm talaimicai nī aṇiyāy
   āḻi am kaṇṇā uṉ kōlap pātam
   piṭittu atu naṭuvu uṉakku arivaiyarum
   palar atu niṟka em peṇmai āṟṟōm
   vaṭittaṭam kaṇ iṇai nīrum nillā
   maṉamum nillā emakku atu taṉṉālē
   veṭippu niṉ pacu nirai mēykkap pōkku
   vēm ematu uyir aḻal meḻukil ukkē (6)
   3810. She says,
   "Put your lovely lotus hands on our heads to adorn them.
   O Kaṇṇan, you carry a beautiful discus.
   There are many girls who want to rub your feet gently.
   I cannot bear the love I have for you.
   The tears from my wide pretty eyes do not stop.
   My mind does not stop loving you.
   We suffer all day when you go to graze the cows.
   My life melts like wax in fire."
   3811 vēm ematu uyir aḻal meḻukil ukku
   veḷ vaḷai mēkalai kaḻaṉṟu vīḻa
   tū malark kaṇ iṇai muttam cōra
   tuṇai mulai payantu eṉa tōḷkaḷ vāṭa
   mā maṇi vaṇṇā uṉ ceṅkamala
   vaṇṇa mel malar aṭi nōva nī pōy
   ā makiḻntu ukantu avai mēykkiṉṟu uṉṉōṭu
   acurarkaḷ talaippeyyil evaṉkol āṅkē? (7)
   3811. She says,
   "My life melts like wax in fire.
   My precious bangles and mekalai ornament become loose.
   My pretty eyes shed pearl-like tears.
   The color of my breasts grows pale.
   My arms become weak.
   You, colored like sapphire, happily go and graze the cows
   even though your soft flower-like feet hurt.
   What will you do if the strong Asurans come to fight with you there?"
   3812 acurarkaḷ talaippeyyil evaṉkol āṅku? eṉṟu
   āḻum eṉ ār uyir āṉ piṉ pōkēl
   kacikaiyum vēṭkaiyum uḷkalantu
   kalaviyum naliyum eṉ kaikaḻiyēl
   vacicey uṉ tāmaraik kaṇṇum vāyum
   kaikaḷum pītaka uṭaiyum kāṭṭi
   ocicey nuṇ iṭai iḷa āycciyar nī
   ukakkum nallavaroṭum uḻitarāyē (8)
   3812. She says,
   "I suffer when I think,
   ‘What will you do if the strong Asurans come to fight with you there?’
   Don’t go behind the cows to graze them.
   The love and weakness I have for you make me suffer.
   Don’t leave me.
   You attract us young cowherd girls with your lotus eyes,
   mouth, hands and the silk clothes you wear.
   Our thin waists may break if we give in to your wiles.
   Give us a place with those you love."
   3813 ukakkum nallavaroṭum uḻitantu uṉ taṉ
   tiruvuḷḷam iṭar keṭumtōṟum nāṅkaḷ
   viyakka iṉpuṟutum em peṇmai āṟṟōm
   em perumāṉ pacu mēykkap pōkēl
   mikap pala acurarkaḷ vēṇṭu uruvam koṇṭu
   niṉṟu uḻitaruvar kañcaṉ ēva
   akappaṭil avaroṭum niṉṉoṭu āṅkē
   avattaṅkaḷ viḷaiyum eṉ col koḷ antō (9)
   3813. She says,
   "We see that you wander
   with the cowherd girls and are happy with them.
   We wonder how they could steal your heart while we cannot.
   Our dear god! Do not go to graze the cows.
   Many Asurans, sent by Kamsan,
   may come in different forms and hurt you.
   If they catch you, you will be in danger.
   Dear one, listen to what I say."
   3814 avattaṅkaḷ viḷaiyum eṉ col koḷ antō
   acurarkaḷ vaṉ kaiyar kañcaṉ ēva
   tavattavar maṟuka niṉṟu uḻitaruvar
   taṉimaiyum peritu uṉakku irāmaṉaiyum
   uvarttalai uṭaṉ tirikilaiyum eṉṟu eṉṟu
   ūṭuṟa eṉṉuṭai āvi vēmāl
   tivattilum pacu nirai mēyppu uvatti
   ceṅkaṉi vāy eṅkaḷ āyar tēvē (10)
   3814. She says,
   "You will be in danger. Dear one, hear what I say!
   The Asurans with their powerful arms have been sent by Kamsan
   and will come to give you trouble.
   Even sages are terrified when they see them.
   You will be alone.
   You wander by yourself and don’t take your brother Balarama with you.
   My heart suffers thinking how you will be in trouble.
   You like to graze the cows more than you enjoy staying in the highest
   heaven.
   You have a mouth that is sweet as a fruit.
   You are the god of the cowherds."
   3815 ceṅkaṉi vāy eṅkaḷ āyar tēvu at
   tiruvaṭi tiruvaṭimēl porunal
   caṅku aṇi tuṟaivaṉ vaṇ teṉ kurukūr
   vaṇ caṭakōpaṉ col āyirattuḷ
   maṅkaiyar āycciyar āynta mālai
   avaṉoṭum pirivataṟku iraṅki taiyal
   aṅku avaṉ pacu nirai mēyppu oḻippāṉ
   uraittaṉa ivaiyum pattu avaṟṟiṉ cārvē (11)
   3815. Saḍagopan, the famous poet
   of flourishing southern Thirukurugur
   where the seashore is filled with conches
   composed a thousand pasurams worshiping the divine feet
   of the god of the cowherds whose red mouth is sweet as a fruit.
   These ten pasurams describe how the cowherd girls are distressed
   when he goes to graze the cows and they are separated from him.
   -------------
   tiruvāymoḻi pattām pattu (nāṉkām tirumoḻi, 3816-3826)
   āḻvār tām peṟak karutiya pakti palittamaiyai aruḷicceytal
   3816 cārvē tavaneṟikkut tāmōtaraṉ tāḷkaḷ
   kār mēka vaṇṇaṉ kamala nayaṉattaṉ
   nīr vāṉam maṇ eri kāl āy niṉṟa nēmiyāṉ
   pēr vāṉavarkaḷ pitaṟṟum perumaiyaṉē (1)
   3816. Worshiping the feet of Damodharan is the only way
   to perform tapas for him.
   He has the color of dark clouds and lotus eyes.
   He is water, sky, earth, fire and wind and carries a discus.
   He has such fame that all the gods in the sky
   repeat his names and praise him.
   3817 perumaiyaṉē vāṉattu imaiyōrkkum kāṇṭaṟku
   arumaiyaṉē ākattu aṇaiyātārkku eṉṟum
   tiru mey uṟaikiṉṟa ceṅkaṇ māl nāḷum
   irumai viṉai kaṭintu iṅku eṉṉai āḷkiṉṟāṉē (2)
   3817. He is praised by all the gods in the sky
   yet it is impossible for those gods to see him.
   If devotees do not embrace him in their hearts
   they will not be able to see the beautiful lotus-eyed Maal
   and lovely Lakshmi on the lotus
   who stays on his chest as he embraces her.
   He destroyed my good and bad karma and rules me here.
   3818 āḷkiṉṟāṉ āḻiyāṉ ārāl kuṟaivu uṭaiyam?
   mīḷkiṉṟatu illai piṟavit tuyar kaṭintōm
   vāḷ keṇṭai oṇkaṇ maṭap piṉṉai taṉ kēḷvaṉ
   tāḷ kaṇṭukoṇṭu eṉ talaimēl puṉaintēṉē (3)
   3818. He carries a discus and rules all.
   We will not suffer trouble from anyone.
   We will not be born on this earth.
   The sorrows that births give are gone.
   Beautiful Nappinnai, the beloved of the lord,
   has lovely eyes like shining kendai fish.
   I will worship his feet and place them on my head.
   3819 talaimēl puṉaintēṉ caraṇaṅkaḷ āliṉ
   ilaimēl tuyiṉṟāṉ imaiyōr vaṇaṅka
   malaimēl tāṉ niṉṟu eṉ maṉattuḷ iruntāṉai
   nilai pērkkal ākāmai niccittu iruntēṉē (4)
   3819. I place his feet on my head.
   He sleeps on a banyan leaf.
   He stands on the Venkaṭam hills
   as the gods in the sky worship him.
   He stays in my heart
   and I am sure that no trouble will come to me.
   3820 niccittu iruntēṉ eṉ neñcam kaḻiyāmai
   kaic cakkarattu aṇṇal kaḷvam peritu uṭaiyaṉ
   meccappaṭāṉ piṟarkku meypōlum poy vallaṉ
   naccappaṭum namakku nākattu aṇaiyāṉē (5)
   3820. I am sure that he will not go away from my heart.
   The highest lord carries a discus in his hand.
   He is truly a thief—
   no one knows what he is doing.
   He tells lies as if they are truths.
   He sleeps on a snake bed and is lovable.
   3821 nākattu aṇaiyāṉai nāḷtōṟum ñāṉattāl
   ākattu aṇaippārkku aruḷceyyum ammāṉai
   mākattu iḷa matiyam cērum caṭaiyāṉaip
   pākattu vaittāṉ taṉ pātam paṇintēṉē (6)
   3821. He sleeps on a snake bed.
   If devotees embrace our father in their hearts,
   he gives his grace to them.
   In his body, the lord keeps Shiva
   who has the crescent moon
   that brightens the sky in his jaṭa.
   I worship the feet of the lord.
   3822 paṇi neñcē nāḷum parama paramparaṉai
   piṇi oṉṟum cārā piṟavi keṭuttu āḷum
   maṇi niṉṟa cōti matucūtaṉ eṉ ammāṉ
   aṇi niṉṟa cempoṉ aṭal āḻiyāṉē (7)
   3822. O heart,
   worship the highest of the highest lords
   and no sickness will come to you.
   He is a shining light that destroys the births of his devotees.
   He, my father, is Madhusudanan.
   He is pure precious gold.
   He carries a heroic discus.
   3823 āḻiyāṉ āḻi amararkkum appālāṉ
   ūḻiyāṉ ūḻi paṭaittāṉ nirai mēyttāṉ
   pāḻi am tōḷāl varai eṭuttāṉ pātaṅkaḷ
   vāḻi eṉ neñcē! maṟavātu vāḻkaṇṭāy (8)
   3823. He carries a discus in his hands.
   He is beyond even all the gods of the sky.
   When the world ended, only he lived,
   and then he created the whole world again.
   He grazed the cows.
   He carried Govardhana mountain with his strong arms.
   O heart, praise his feet and live without forgetting him.
   3824 kaṇṭēṉ kamala malarp pātam kāṇṭalumē
   viṇṭē oḻinta viṉaiyāyiṉa ellām
   toṇṭē ceytu eṉṟum toḻutu vaḻiyoḻuka
   paṇṭē paramaṉ paṇitta paṇivakaiyē (9)
   3824. I found the lotus feet of the lord.
   As soon as I saw him all my karma was destroyed.
   I worship him and live serving others always
   as the highest lord has commanded us to do
   from ancient times.
   3825 vakaiyāl maṉam oṉṟi mātavaṉai nāḷum
   pukaiyāl viḷakkāl putu malarāl nīrāl
   ticaitōṟu amararkaḷ ceṉṟu iṟaiñca niṉṟa
   takaiyāṉ caraṇam tamarkaṭku ōr paṟṟē (10)
   3825. Thinking only of him in their hearts,
   the gods in the sky in all the directions
   worship Madhavan every day
   with fragrant smoke, lamps, fresh flowers and water.
   He is the only refuge for all his devotees,
   the only thing they can hold on to.
   3826 paṟṟu eṉṟu paṟṟi parama paramparaṉai
   mal tiṇ tōḷ mālai vaḻuti vaḷanāṭaṉ
   col toṭai antāti ōr āyirattuḷ ip pattum
   kaṟṟārkku ōr paṟṟākum kaṇṇaṉ kaḻal iṇaiyē (11)
   3826. Saḍagopan of the flourishing Pandyan country
   composed a thousand pasurams with beautiful words
   in the andadi metre on the highest of the high
   whom he took as his refuge.
   If devotees learn and recite these ten pasurams
   they will reach Kaṇṇan’s ankleted feet
   and he will be their refuge.
   ------------
   tiruvāymoḻi pattām pattu (aintām tirumoḻi, 3827-3837)
   pakti paṇṇum vakaikaḷait tokuttuk kūṟal
   3827 kaṇṇaṉ kaḻal iṇai
   naṇṇum maṉam uṭaiyīr
   eṇṇum tirunāmam
   tiṇṇam nāraṇamē (1)
   3827. O devotees
   Your minds should think only of joining the feet of Kaṇṇan.
   The only divine name you should think of is Naraṇan.
   Trust in this and you will be taken to the feet to the god.
   3828 nāraṇaṉ emmāṉ
   pār aṇaṅku āḷaṉ
   vāraṇam tolaitta
   kāraṇaṉ tāṉē (2)
   3828. He is our father Naraṇan.
   He is the ruler of the earth goddess.
   He killed the elephant Kuvalayabeedaam.
   He is the origin of all the worlds.
   3829 tāṉē ulaku ellām
   tāṉē paṭaittu iṭantu
   tāṉē uṇṭu umiḻntu
   tāṉē āḷvāṉē (3)
   3829. He is himself all the world.
   He created the world, split it open,
   swallowed it and spit it out.
   He rules all the worlds.
   3830 āḷvāṉ āḻi nīrk
   kōḷvāy aravu aṇaiyāṉ
   tāḷvāy malar iṭṭu
   nāḷvāy nāṭīrē (4)
   3830. The god sleeps on the ocean on a snake bed
   and rules the world.
   Place fresh flowers at his feet
   and worship him every day.
   3831 nāṭīr nāḷtōṟum
   vāṭā malarkoṇṭu
   pāṭīr avaṉ nāmam
   vīṭē peṟalāmē (5)
   3831. Place blooming fresh flowers
   every day at his feet,
   worship him and recite his names
   and you will reach moksha.
   3832 mēyāṉ vēṅkaṭam
   kāyāmalar vaṇṇaṉ
   pēyār mulai uṇṭa
   vāyāṉ mātavaṉē (6)
   3832. He has the dark color of a kayam flower.
   He drank milk from the breasts of the devil Putana.
   He is Madhavan
   and stays in the Thiruvenkaṭam hills.
   3833 mātavaṉ eṉṟu eṉṟu
   ōta vallīrēl
   tītu oṉṟum aṭaiyā
   ētam cārāvē (7)
   3833. If you recite always the name of the lord saying,
   "Madhavan, Madhavan!"
   all your karma will disappear.
   No trouble will come to you.
   3834 cārā ētaṅkaḷ
   nīr ār mukil vaṇṇaṉ
   pēr ār ōtuvār
   ārār amararē (8)
   3834. All who recite the names
   of the dark cloud-colored lord
   become gods in the sky.
   No troubles will come to them.
   3835 amararkku ariyāṉai
   tamarkaṭku eḷiyāṉai
   amarat toḻuvārkaṭku
   amarā viṉaikaḷē (9)
   3835. The gods in the sky cannot know him
   yet he is easy for his devotees to know.
   If devotees worship the lord in the sky,
   the results of their karma will go away.
   3836 viṉai val iruḷ eṉṉum
   muṉaikaḷ veruvip pōm
   cuṉai nal malar iṭṭu
   niṉaimiṉ neṭiyāṉē (10)
   3836. Worship the lord Nediyaan
   with beautiful flowers that have bloomed in springs.
   Any good or bad karma that is like past or future darkness
   will give you no trouble and disappear.
   3837 neṭiyāṉ aruḷ cūṭum
   paṭiyāṉ caṭakōpaṉ
   noṭi āyirattu ip pattu
   aṭiyārkku aruḷpēṟē (11)
   3837. Saḍagopan, the devotee blessed by the god Neḍiyaan,
   composed a thousand pasurams on the highest god.
   If devotees learn and recite these,
   they will have the grace of the lord.
   -----------
   tiruvāymoḻi pattām pattu (āṟām tirumoḻi, 3838-3848)
   tamakkup pēṟu aḷikkac camayam pārttirunta pēraruḷaip pārāṭṭi
   āḻvār neñcuṭaṉ kūṟutal (tiruvāṭṭāṟu)
   3838 aruḷpeṟuvār aṭiyār tam aṭiyaṉēṟku āḻiyāṉ
   aruḷtaruvāṉ amaikiṉṟāṉ atu namatu vitivakaiyē
   iruḷ taru mā ñālattuḷ iṉip piṟavi yāṉ vēṇṭēṉ
   maruḷ oḻi nī maṭa neñcē vāṭṭāṟṟāṉ aṭi vaṇaṅkē (1)
   3838. I am a devotee of the devotees
   who have the grace of the lord.
   He carries a discus and will give his grace to me.
   We will have his grace according to our fate.
   I do not want births on this earth that give sorrow in life.
   O ignorant heart! Don’t be confused.
   Worship the feet of the lord of Thiruvaaṭṭaṛu.
   3839 vāṭṭāṟṟāṉ aṭi vaṇaṅki mā ñālap piṟappu aṟuppāṉ
   kēṭṭāyē maṭa neñcē! kēcavaṉ em perumāṉaip
   pāṭṭu āya pala pāṭi paḻaviṉaikaḷ paṟṟu aṟuttu
   nāṭṭārōṭu iyalvu oḻintu nāraṇaṉai naṇṇiṉamē (2)
   3839. Worship the feet of the lord of Thiruvaaṭṭaaṛu
   and he will remove your births on this wide earth.
   O heart! Did you listen to what I say?
   We sing many songs and praise our great lord Kesavan
   and the results of all our karma have gone away.
   We have no desire and no relationship with the world
   and we have joined him.
   3840 naṇṇiṉam nārāyaṇaṉai nāmaṅkaḷ pala colli
   maṇ ulakil vaḷam mikka vāṭṭāṟṟāṉ vantu iṉṟu
   viṇ ulakam taruvāṉāy viraikiṉṟāṉ vitivakaiyē
   eṇṇiṉavāṟu ākā ik karumaṅkaḷ eṉ neñcē (3)
   3840. We praised his many names and approached Narayaṇan.
   He has come to rich Thiruvaaṭṭaaṛu flourishing on this earth
   and stayed there.
   Quickly, he will give his grace to his devotees
   so that they can reach moksha.
   O heart! We will achieve what we want if we worship him.
   3841 eṉ neñcattu uḷ iruntu iṅku irum tamiḻ nūl ivai moḻintu
   val neñcattu iraṇiyaṉai mārvu iṭanta vāṭṭāṟṟāṉ
   maṉ añca pāratattup pāṇṭavarkkāp paṭaitoṭṭāṉ
   nal neñcē nam perumāṉ namakku aruḷ tāṉ ceyvāṉē (4)
   3841. The lord stays in my heart
   and inspires me to compose Tamil pasurams.
   He split open Hiraṇyan’s strong chest
   and he fought in the Bharatha war for the Pandavas.
   O good heart, our great lord of Thiruvaaṭṭaaṛu
   truly gives his grace to us.
   3842 vāṉ ēṟa vaḻi tanta vāṭṭāṟṟāṉ paṇivakaiyē
   nāṉ ēṟap peṟukiṉṟēṉ narakattai naku neñcē!
   tēṉ ēṟu malart tuḷavam tikaḻ pātaṉ ceḻum paṟavai
   tāṉ ēṟit tirivāṉa tāḷ iṇai eṉ talaimēlē (5)
   3842. He rides on beautiful Garuḍa.
   His shining feet are decorated
   with fragrant thulasi garlands dripping with honey.
   He, the lord of Thiruvaaṭṭaaṛu,
   has placed his lotus feet on my head
   and will show me the way to moksa .
   O heart, I will not go to hell—let us laugh at it.
   3843 talaimēla tāḷ iṇaikaḷ tāmaraikkaṇ eṉ ammāṉ
   nilaipērāṉ eṉ neñcattu eppoḻutum em perumāṉ
   malai māṭattu aravu aṇaimēl vāṭṭāṟṟāṉ matam mikka
   kolai yāṉai maruppu ocittāṉ kurai kaḻalkaḷ kuṟukiṉamē (6)
   3843. My lotus-eyed father
   placed both of his lotus feet on my head.
   He will not leave my heart but will remain there always.
   He, the lord of Thiruvaaṭṭaaṛu surrounded by hills and palaces,
   sleeps on a snake bed.
   He broke the tusks of the murderous elephant.
   I have approached his feet that are adorned with sounding anklets.
   3844 kurai kaḻalkaḷ kuṟukiṉam nam kōvintaṉ kuṭikoṇṭāṉ
   tirai kuḻuvu kaṭal puṭai cūḻ teṉ nāṭṭut tilatam aṉṉa
   varai kuḻuvu maṇi māṭa vāṭṭāṟṟāṉ malar aṭimēl
   virai kuḻuvu naṟum tuḷavam meynniṉṟu kamaḻumē (7)
   3844. I approached the feet of Govindan
   ornamented with sounding anklets.
   He has entered my heart and stays there.
   He is the god of Thiruvaṭṭaaṛu
   surrounded by hills and oceans with roaring waves
   and filled with palaces studded with jewels,
   a place that is like a thilakam of the southern land.
   The fragrance of thulasi on his lotus feet spreads everywhere.
   3845 meynniṉṟu kamaḻ tuḷava virai ēṟu tirumuṭiyaṉ
   kainniṉṟa cakkarattaṉ karutum iṭam porutu puṉal
   mainniṉṟa varai pōlum tiru uruva vāṭṭāṟṟāṟku
   en naṉṟi ceytēṉā eṉ neñcil tikaḻvatuvē? (8)
   3845. His divine hair is beautifully decorated
   with fragrant thulasi garlands.
   He is like a dark hill and carries a discus in his hand.
   He wishes to stay in Thiruvaṭṭaaṛu
   surrounded by the ocean with roaring waves.
   What good karma I must have done!
   He shines and stays in my heart.
   3846 tikaḻkiṉṟa tirumārpil tirumaṅkai taṉṉōṭum
   tikaḻkiṉṟa tirumālār cērviṭam taṇ vāṭṭāṟu
   pukaḻniṉṟa puḷ ūrti pōr arakkar kulam keṭuttāṉ
   ikaḻvu iṉṟi eṉ neñcattu eppoḻutum piriyāṉē (9)
   3846. The beautiful Thirumal stays in Thiruvaṭṭaaṛu
   and the goddess of wealth Lakshmi
   stays on his divine shining chest.
   He rides on Garuḍa
   and destroyed the clan of his enemies, the Asurans.
   He will never dislike me
   and he will never leave my heart.
   3847 piriyātu āṭcey eṉṟu piṟappu aṟuttu āḷ aṟakkoṇṭāṉ
   ari āki iraṇiyaṉai ākam kīṇṭāṉ aṉṟu
   periyārkku āṭpaṭṭakkāl peṟāta payaṉ peṟumāṟu
   vari vāḷ vāy aravu aṇaimēl vāṭṭāṟṟāṉ kāṭṭiṉaṉē (10)
   3847. He will not leave me and he rules me.
   He destroyed my births and rules me with love.
   He took the form of a man-lion
   and split open the chest of Hiraṇyan.
   He sleeps in Thiruvaṭṭaaṛu on Adisesha the snake
   with a shining mouth and a lined body.
   If someone receives the grace of the great god,
   he will have a reward that no one can obtain.
   3848 kāṭṭit taṉ kaṉai kaḻalkaḷ kaṭu narakam pukal oḻitta
   vāṭṭāṟṟu em perumāṉai vaḷaṅ kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ
   pāṭṭāya tamiḻ mālai āyirattuḷ ip pattum
   kēṭṭu ārār vāṉavarkaḷ cevikku iṉiya ceñcollē (11)
   3848. Saḍagopan of rich Thirukuruhur
   composed a garland of a thousand Tamil pasurams
   on our dear god of Thiruvaṭṭaaṛu
   who showed his sounding anklets to his devotees
   and saved them from cruel hell.
   Even the gods in the sky are happy to hear
   these ten pasurams that are sweet to the ears.
   -------------
   tiruvāymoḻi pattām pattu (ēḻām tirumoḻi, 3849-3859)
   āḻvār tamatu mēṉiyiṉmēl emperumāṉ vaittuḷḷa
   vāñcaiyaip pārāṭṭip pēcutal (tirumāliruñcōlai)
   3849 ceñcol kavikāḷ uyir kāttu āṭceymmiṉ tirumāliruñcōlai
   vañcak kaḷvaṉ mā māyaṉ māyak kaviyāy vantu eṉ
   neñcum uyirum uḷ kalantu niṉṟār aṟiyāvaṇṇam eṉ
   neñcum uyirum avai uṇṭu tāṉē āki niṟaintāṉē (1)
   3849. O poets, you compose pasurams with lovely words—
   be sure to take care of yourselves.
   He is the great Maayan, the lord of Thirumalirunjolai,
   and he is a cheating thief.
   He will enter your heart and life as a magic poet,
   staying there unknown to anyone,
   and he will devour your heart and life
   and fill them until there is nothing there but him.
   3850 tāṉē āki niṟaintu ellā ulakum uyirum tāṉē āy
   tāṉē yāṉ eṉpāṉ āki taṉṉait tāṉē tutittu eṉakkut
   tēṉē pālē kaṉṉalē amutē tirumāliruñcōlaik
   kōṉē āki niṉṟoḻintāṉ eṉṉai muṟṟum uyir uṇṭē (2)
   3850. He himself is all the world and the creatures in it.
   He is himself and he worships himself.
   He is my honey, milk, sugar juice and nectar.
   He is the lord of Thirumalirunjolai.
   He swallowed all my life and went away.
   3851 eṉṉai muṟṟum uyir uṇṭu eṉ māya ākkai itaṉuḷ pukku
   eṉṉai muṟṟum tāṉē āy niṉṟa māya ammāṉ cēr
   teṉ naṉ tirumāliruñcōlait ticai kaikūppic cērnta yāṉ
   iṉṉum pōvēṉēkolō? eṉkol ammāṉ tiru aruḷē? (3)
   3851. He swallowed all my life.
   He entered my illusory body.
   He himself is me.
   He is Maayan, my father.
   I reached Thirumalirunjolai of the Pandyan country
   and worshiped the lord there folding my hands.
   Do I need to search for him anywhere else?
   Do I need to go somewhere to receive his divine grace?
   3852 eṉkol ammāṉ tiru aruḷkaḷ ulakum uyirum tāṉē āy
   naṉku eṉ uṭalam kaiviṭāṉ ñālattūṭē naṭantu uḻakki
   teṉ koḷ ticaikkut tilatamāy niṉṟa tirumāliruñcōlai
   naṅkaḷ kuṉṟam kaiviṭāṉ naṇṇā acurar naliyavē? (4)
   3852. How can I describe his grace?
   He himself is the world and the creatures in it.
   He will not leave my body.
   He wanders everywhere in the world
   and destroys the Asurans who do not approach him.
   He will not leave the hills of Thirumalirunjolai
   that shines as the thilagam of the southern land.
   3853 naṇṇā acurar nalivu eyta nalla amarar polivu eyta
   eṇṇātaṉakaḷ eṇṇum nal muṉivar iṉpam talaiciṟappa
   paṇ ār pāṭal iṉ kavikaḷ yāṉāyt taṉṉait tāṉ pāṭi
   teṉṉā eṉṉum eṉ ammāṉ tirumāliruñcōlaiyāṉē (5)
   3853. He destroys the Asurans who do not come to him.
   He made the good gods in the sky happy.
   The sages think of the nature of the god however they wish
   even though they do not know what it is
   and yet he still makes them happy.
   He sings himself pleasant songs with music about himself.
   My father, the lord of Thirumalirunjolai sings songs
   with the sound "thennaa, thennaa."
   3854 tirumāliruñcōlaiyāṉē āki ceḻu mūvulakum taṉ
   oru mā vayiṟṟiṉ uḷḷē vaittu ūḻi ūḻi talaiyaḷikkum
   tirumāl eṉṉai āḷum māl civaṉum piramaṉum kāṇātu
   aru māl eyti aṭi parava aruḷai īnta ammāṉē (6)
   3854. He is the lord of Thirumalirunjolai.
   He swallowed all the rich worlds
   and kept them in his great stomach.
   He is the lord and gives his grace to the world eon after eon.
   The god Thirumal rules the world.
   Shiva and Brahma, unable to find his head or feet,
   worshiped him and he gave his grace to them.
   3855 aruḷai ī eṉ ammāṉē eṉṉum mukkaṇ ammāṉum
   teruḷ koḷ piramaṉ ammāṉum tēvar kōṉum tēvarum
   iruḷkaḷ kaṭiyum muṉivarum ēttum ammāṉ tirumalai
   maruḷkaḷ kaṭiyum maṇimalai tirumāliruñcōlai malaiyē (7)
   3855. Thirumalirunjolai,
   the divine jewel-filled hill that takes away the ignorance of all,
   is where the three-eyed Shiva, the wise Brahma,
   Indra the king of gods, all the gods,
   and the sages who remove ignorance
   praise the lord saying, "O father, give us your grace."
   3856 tirumāliruñcōlai malaiyē tiruppāṟkaṭalē eṉ talaiyē
   tirumāl vaikuntamē taṇ tiruvēṅkaṭamē eṉatu uṭalē
   aru mā māyattu eṉatu uyirē maṉamē vākkē karumamē
   oru mā noṭiyum piriyāṉ eṉ ūḻi mutalvaṉ oruvaṉē (8)
   3856. Thirumalirunjolai hill and the divine milky ocean are my head.
   The lands of Thirumaal, Vaikuṇṭam and Thiruvenkaṭam are my body.
   Even for a moment he will not leave my illusory life,
   my mind, my words and my deeds.
   He is unique, the ancient one of the eon,
   and he will not leave me.
   3857 ūḻi mutalvaṉ oruvaṉē eṉṉum oruvaṉ ulaku ellām
   ūḻitōṟum taṉṉuḷḷē paṭaittu kāttu keṭuttu uḻalum
   āḻivaṇṇaṉ eṉ ammāṉ am taṇ tirumāliruñcōlai
   vāḻi maṉamē! kaiviṭēl uṭalum uyirum maṅka oṭṭē (9)
   3857. He alone was left at the end of the eon.
   He created, protected and destroyed all creatures
   at the end of the world.
   O mind, think only of beautiful cool Thirumalirunjolai
   where our father, the ocean-colored god, stays.
   Do not forget him.
   He is in your body and soul.
   3858 maṅka oṭṭu uṉ mā māyai tirumāliruñcōlai mēya
   naṅkaḷ kōṉē yāṉē nī āki eṉṉai aḷittāṉē
   poṅku aimpulaṉum poṟi aintum karumēntiriyam aimpūtam
   iṅku iv uyir ēy pirakiruti māṉ āṅkāram maṉaṅkaḷē. (10)
   3858. There is no limit to your Maayai.
   You are our king of Thirumalirunjolai.
   You are I and you gave me your grace.
   The five feelings—seeing, hearing, breathing, taste and touch—
   and the body parts—eyes, ears, nose, mouth and the part that acts—
   and five elements—sky, wind, sound, light and ether—
   and this life on earth, nature, the self, sense of ego and mind
   are all only you.
   3858 māṉ āṅkāram maṉam keṭa aivar vaṉkaiyar maṅka
   tāṉ āṅkāramāyp pukku tāṉē tāṉē āṉāṉait
   tēṉ āṅkārap poḻil kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ col āyirattuḷ
   māṉ āṅkārattu ivai pattum tirumāliruñcōlai malaikkē. (11)
   3859. Saḍagopan of Thirukurugur
   surrounded by beautiful groves dripping with honey
   composed a thousand pasurams praising the lord
   who destroys the feelings of the five senses
   and the ego-centered mind.
   He himself is the creator of the mind and of all the five senses.
   If devotees learn and recite these ten pasurams
   on Thirumalirunjolai surrounded by groves dripping with honey,
   the feelings of their senses and mind will be destroyed.
   -------------
   tiruvāymoḻi pattām pattu (eṭṭām tirumoḻi, 3860-3870)
   kāraṇam iṉṟiyē aruḷi makiḻum emperumāṉatu
   tiṟattaip pēcutal (tiruppēr nakar)
   3860 tirumāliruñcōlai malai eṉṟēṉ eṉṉa
   tirumāl vantu eṉ neñcu niṟaiyap pukuntāṉ
   kuru mā maṇi untu puṉal poṉṉit teṉpāl
   tirumāl ceṉṟu cērviṭam teṉ tiruppērē (1)
   3860. When I said, "Thirumalirunjolai!"
   Thirumal came and entered my heart making it full.
   The southern Thirupperur where the water of the Ponni river
   brings large precious stones and leaves them on its banks
   is where Thirumaal stays.
   3861 pērē uṟaikiṉṟa pirāṉ iṉṟu vantu
   pērēṉ eṉṟu eṉ neñcu niṟaiyap pukuntāṉ
   kār ēḻ kaṭal ēḻ malai ēḻ ulaku uṇṭum
   ārā vayiṟṟāṉai aṭaṅkap piṭittēṉē (2)
   3861. The lord of Thiruperur came, entered my heart
   and said,"I will not leave you."
   Even though he swallowed all the seven clouds in the sky,
   the seven oceans, the seven mountains and the seven worlds
   it was not enough for him.
   I have caught him tightly in my heart and he stays there.
   3862 piṭittēṉ piṟavi keṭuttēṉ piṇi cārēṉ
   maṭittēṉ maṉai vāḻkkaiyuḷ niṟpatu ōr māyaiyai
   koṭik kōpura māṭaṅkaḷ cūḻ tiruppērāṉ
   aṭic cērvatu eṉakku eḷitu āyiṉavāṟē (3)
   3862. I have caught him tightly and make him stay in my heart.
   My future births are destroyed.
   I will not get any sickness.
   I do not want illusory family life.
   Now it is easy for me to join the feet of the god
   of Thiruperur filled with palaces that have towers
   with flags flying on them.
   3863 eḷitāyiṉavāṟu eṉṟu eṉ kaṇkaḷ kaḷippak
   kaḷitu ākiya cintaiyaṉāyk kaḷikkiṉṟēṉ
   kiḷi tāviya cōlaikaḷ cūḻ tiruppērāṉ
   teḷitu ākiya cēṇ vicumpu taruvāṉē (4)
   3863. My heart and my eyes are delighted
   knowing that it is easy to reach the god.
   The lord of Thiruperur
   surrounded by groves where parrots fly
   will give me moksa in the sky
   that is pure and divine.
   3864 vāṉē taruvāṉ eṉakkāy eṉṉōṭu oṭṭi
   ūṉ ēy kurampai itaṉuḷ pukuntu iṉṟu
   tāṉē taṭumāṟṟa viṉaikaḷ tavirttāṉ
   tēṉ ēy poḻil teṉ tiruppēr nakarāṉē (5)
   3864. The god of southern Thiruperur
   surrounded by groves dripping with honey
   wished to give me moksha and came to me, entering my body.
   He removed the karma that gives me confusion.
   3865 tiruppēr nakarāṉ tirumāliruñcōlaip
   poruppē uṟaikiṉṟa pirāṉ iṉṟu vantu
   iruppēṉ eṉṟu eṉ neñcu niṟaiyap pukuntāṉ
   viruppē peṟṟu amutam uṇṭu kaḷittēṉē (6)
   3865. The god of Thiruperur
   who stays in the hills of Thirumalirunjolai
   came to me today, said, "I will stay with you!"
   and entered my heart, filling it.
   I received his love
   and am blissful, as if I had drunk nectar.
   3866 uṇṭu kaḷittēṟku umpar eṉ kuṟai mēlait
   toṇṭu ukaḷittu anti toḻum collup peṟṟēṉ
   vaṇṭu kaḷikkum poḻil cūḻ tiruppērāṉ
   kaṇṭu kaḷippa kaṇṇuḷ niṉṟu akalāṉē? (7)
   3866. I am happy because I drank his nectar.
   I am like the gods and need nothing.
   I have served him
   and in the evening I worship the god of Thiruperur
   surrounded by groves where joyful bees drink honey.
   He is happy to be before my eyes,
   never leaving my sight.
   3867 kaṇṇuḷ niṉṟu akalāṉ karuttiṉkaṇ periyaṉ
   eṇṇil nuṇ poruḷ ēḻ icaiyiṉ cuvai tāṉē
   vaṇṇa nal maṇi māṭaṅkaḷ cūḻ tiruppērāṉ
   tiṇṇam eṉ maṉattup pukuntāṉ ceṟintu iṉṟē (8)
   3867. He stays before my eyes and does not leave.
   He is in all my thoughts.
   When you think of him, he may be something tiny.
   He is the seven musical notes.
   The god of Thiruperur
   surrounded by beautiful palaces
   studded with jewels and tall as mountains
   truly entered my heart today.
   3868 iṉṟu eṉṉaip poruḷākki taṉṉai eṉṉuḷ vaittāṉ
   aṉṟu eṉṉaip puṟampōkap puṇarttatu eṉ ceyvāṉ?
   kuṉṟu eṉṉat tikaḻ māṭaṅkaḷ cūḻ tiruppērāṉ
   oṉṟu eṉakku aruḷ ceyya uṇarttal uṟṟēṉē (9)
   3868. He made me important today.
   He entered my heart and I keep him there.
   Why did he make me wander about,
   involved in the pleasures of five senses?
   What did he gain by that?
   The lord of Thiruperur
   surrounded by shining hills that are like palaces
   gave me his grace
   and I understood why I was hurt by my senses.
   3869 uṟṟēṉ ukantu paṇiceytu uṉ pātam
   peṟṟēṉ ītē iṉṉam vēṇṭuvatu entāy
   kaṟṟār maṟaivāṇarkaḷ cūḻ tiruppērāṟku
   aṟṟār aṭiyār tamakku allal nillāvē (10)
   3869. I served you and received the grace to worship your feet.
   O my father, this is the only thing I ever want.
   If devotees give up their desire for the world
   and become the slaves of the lord of Thiruperur
   where Brahmins live who know the Vedas well,
   they will have no trouble in their lives.
   3870 nillā allal nīḷ vayal cūḻ tiruppērmēl
   nallār palar vāḻ kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ
   col ār tamiḻ āyirattuḷ ivai pattum
   vallār toṇṭar āḷvatu cūḻ poṉ vicumpē (11)
   3870. Saḍagopan of Thiruperur
   surrounded by flourishing fields and filled with good people
   composed a thousand Tamil pasurams with beautiful words.
   If devotees learn and recite these ten Tamil pasurams
   and serve the lord,
   they will go to the golden sky and rule there.
   -----------
   tiruvāymoḻi pattām pattu (oṉpatām tirumoḻi, 3871-3881)
   tirunāṭu celvārukku naṭaipeṟum upacāraṅkaḷait
   tāmē aṉupavittup pēcutal
   3871 cūḻ vicumpu aṇi mukil tūriyam muḻakkiṉa
   āḻ kaṭal alai tiraik kai eṭuttu āṭiṉa:
   ēḻ poḻilum vaḷam ēntiya eṉ appaṉ
   vāḻ pukaḻ nāraṇaṉ tamaraik kaṇṭu ukantē (1)
   3871. When they see the devotees
   of my father Naraṇan, praised by all,
   the beautiful clouds in the sky sound like drums.
   The deep oceans dance moving their waves like hands.
   All the seven worlds flourishing with groves feel joy.
   3872 nāraṇaṉ tamaraik kaṇṭu ukantu nal nīr mukil
   pūraṇa poṉ kuṭam pūrittatu uyar viṇṇil
   nīr aṇi kaṭalkaḷ niṉṟu ārttaṉa neṭu varait
   tōraṇam niraittu eṅkum toḻutaṉar ulakē (2)
   3872. Seeing the devotees of Naraṇan,
   the clouds filled with good water look like golden pots.
   Oceans filled with abundant water roar reaching up to the sky.
   The whole world puts up festoons of leaves and flowers
   and worships him.
   3873 toḻutaṉar ulakarkaḷ tūpa nal malar maḻai
   poḻivaṉar pūmi aṉṟu aḷantavaṉ tamar muṉṉē
   eḻumiṉ eṉṟu irumaruṅku icaittaṉar muṉivarkaḷ
   vaḻi itu vaikuntarkku eṉṟu vantu etirē (3)
   3873. Everyone in the world worships his devotees.
   They sprinkle a rain of flowers and show fragrances to them.
   Sages stand at both sides of the devotees
   of the god who measured the world and say,
   "Come, this is the way to go to Vaikuṇṭam."
   3874 etir etir imaiyavar iruppiṭam vakuttaṉar
   katiravar avar avar kainnirai kāṭṭiṉar
   atir kural muracaṅkaḷ alai kaṭal muḻakku otta
   matu viri tuḻāy muṭi mātavaṉ tamarkkē (4)
   3874. The gods in the sky make places
   for the devotees to stay in front of them.
   The twelve suns show each one of them
   with their hands the way to moksha.
   The loud sound of the drums roars out
   like the sound of the waves in the ocean.
   This is all for the devotees of Madhavan
   who wears thulasi garlands dripping with honey in his hair.
   3875 mātavaṉ tamar eṉṟu vācalil vāṉavar
   pōtumiṉ ematu iṭam pukutuka eṉṟalum
   kītaṅkaḷ pāṭiṉar kiṉṉarar keruṭarkaḷ
   vēta nal vāyavar vēḷvi uḷmaṭuttē (5)
   3875. The gods in the sky know
   that they are devotees of Madhavan.
   They welcome them at the thresholds
   and say, "Come, enter into our homes."
   The Kinnarars and Garuḍas sing songs.
   The good sages who know the Vedas
   perform sacrifices and worship them.
   3876 vēḷvi uḷmaṭuttalum virai kamaḻ naṟum pukai
   kāḷaṅkaḷ valampuri kalantu eṅkum icaittaṉar
   āḷmiṉkaḷ vāṉakam āḻiyāṉ tamar eṉṟu
   vāḷ oṇ kaṇ maṭantaiyar vāḻttiṉar makiḻntē (6)
   3876. The sages perform sacrifices
   and the fragrant smoke spreads everywhere.
   Some play music with kaaḷams and valampuri conches.
   Women with eyes like glistening swords
   praise them joyfully and say,
   "The lord carries a discus in his hand
   and you are his devotees.
   You come to rule the world of the sky."
   3877 maṭantaiyar vāḻttalum marutarum vacukkaḷum
   toṭarntu eṅkum tōttiram colliṉar toṭukaṭal
   kiṭanta em kēcavaṉ kiḷar oḷi maṇimuṭi
   kuṭantai em kōvalaṉ kuṭi aṭiyārkkē (7)
   3877. The Apsarasas sing praises
   and the Maruts and Vasus recite praises everywhere
   for the devotees of Kesavan, the lord of the cowherds,
   who wears a shining crown studded with jewels
   and sleeps on the ocean in Kuḍandai.
   3878 kuṭi aṭiyār ivar kōvintaṉ taṉakku eṉṟu
   muṭi uṭai vāṉavar muṟai muṟai etirkoḷḷa
   koṭi aṇi neṭu matiḷ kōpuram kuṟukiṉar
   vaṭivu uṭai mātavaṉ vaikuntam pukavē (8)
   3878. The gods in the sky wearing golden crowns
   welcome the devotees, praise them and say,
   "These devotees come from the families of devotees.
   For us, they are Govindan."
   The devotees of the divine Madhavan enter Vaikuṇṭam
   with towers and tall beautiful walls where flags fly.
   3879 vaikuntam pukutalum vācalil vāṉavar
   vaikuntaṉ tamar emar ematu iṭam pukuta eṉṟu
   vaikuntattu amararum muṉivarum viyantaṉar
   vaikuntam pukuvatu maṇṇavar vitiyē (9)
   3879. When the devotees enter Vaikuṇṭam,
   the gods in the sky come to the gate and say,
   "The devotees of the god are our friends.
   May you come to our home."
   The gods and sages welcome them with wonder.
   It is the good fortune of the devotees to enter Vaikuṇṭam.
   3880 vitivakai pukuntaṉar eṉṟu nal vētiyar
   patiyiṉil pāṅkiṉil pātaṅkaḷ kaḻuviṉar
   nitiyum nal cuṇṇamum niṟai kuṭa viḷakkamum
   mati muka maṭantaiyar ēntiṉar vantē (10)
   3880. Good Brahmins wash the feet of the devotees, thinking,
   "These devotees enter here because of their good fortune."
   Women with beautiful moon-like faces
   come carrying precious things, fragrant powders
   and shining pots with water and welcome them .
   3881 vantu avar etir koḷḷa mā maṇi maṇṭapattu
   antam il pēriṉpattu aṭiyarōṭu iruntamai
   kontu alar poḻil kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ col
   cantaṅkaḷ āyirattu ivai vallār muṉivarē (11)
   3881. Saḍagopan of Thirukuruhur
   surrounded with groves blooming with clusters of flowers
   composed a thousand pasurams with music
   describing how the devotees of the god
   come to the heaven of highest pleasure
   and how the gods welcome them
   in their beautiful jewel-studded maṇḍapams.
   ---------
   tiruvāymoḻi pattām pattu (pattām tirumoḻi, 3882-3892)
   āḻvār parama paktiyāl kaṉintu tirumālait tām aṭaintamaiyai aruḷicceytal
   3882 muṉiyē nāṉmukaṉē mukkaṇ appā eṉ pollāk
   kaṉivāyt tāmaraik kaṇ karu māṇikkamē eṉ kaḷvā
   taṉiyēṉ ār uyirē eṉ talaimicaiyāy vantiṭṭu
   iṉi nāṉ pōkal oṭṭēṉ oṉṟum māyam ceyyēl eṉṉaiyē (1)
   3882. O god, you are the sages,
   Brahma with faces in all directions,
   and Shiva our father with three eyes.
   O god, you are a dark-colored shining jewel,
   you have a sweet fruit-like mouth
   and your eyes are beautiful like lotuses.
   You are a thief.
   I am alone, you are my life.
   Your divine feet are on my head.
   I will not let you go away.
   Do not do your tricks on me.
   3883 māyam ceyyēl eṉṉai uṉ tiru mārvattu mālai naṅkai
   vācam cey pūṅ kuḻalāḷ tiru āṇai niṉ āṇaikaṇṭāy
   nēcam ceytu uṉṉōṭu eṉṉai uyir vēṟu iṉṟi oṉṟākavē
   kūcam ceyyātu koṇṭāy eṉṉaik kūvik koḷḷāy vantu antō! (2)
   3883. Don’t cheat me.
   I promise on Lakshmi on a fragrant beautiful lotus
   on your divine chest.
   See, this is your promise.
   You make friendship with me.
   You joined my life with you and we cannot be separated.
   Do not ignore me.
   Call me and join me with your feet.
   3884 kūvik koḷḷāy vantu antō! eṉ pollāk karumāṇikkamē
   āvikku ōr paṟṟukkompu niṉ alāl aṟikiṉṟilēṉ yāṉ
   mēvit toḻum piramaṉ civaṉ intiraṉ ātikku ellām
   nāvik kamala mutal kiḻaṅkē umpar anta atuvē (3)
   3884. Call me and join me with you.
   You are a faultless dark jewel.
   I do not know any support for my life except you.
   You are the origin of Brahma, Shiva, Indra
   and all the other gods .
   You are the root of all and they all worship you.
   You are the god of the gods in the sky.
   3885 umpar am taṇ pāḻē ō ataṉuḷmicai nīyē ō
   amparam nal cōti ataṉuḷ piramaṉ araṉ nī
   umparum yātavarum paṭaitta muṉivaṉ avaṉ nī
   emparam cātikkaluṟṟu eṉṉaip pōra viṭṭiṭṭāyē (4)
   3885. You are the beautiful, precious source
   of the gods in the sky.
   You are inside all souls.
   You are the shining light in the sky.
   You are Brahma and Shiva.
   You created the sages, the gods in the sky,
   the cowherds and all others.
   I thought you would take care of me
   but you left me alone and went away.
   3886 pōra viṭṭiṭṭu eṉṉai nī puṟam pōkkaluṟṟāl piṉṉai yāṉ
   āraik koṇṭu ettai? antō eṉatu eṉpatu eṉ? yāṉ eṉpatu eṉ?
   tīra irumpu uṇṭa nīr atu pōla eṉ ār uyirai
   ārap paruka eṉakku ārā amutu āṉāyē (5)
   3886. You left me and made me wander alone.
   How could I depend on you, my lord?
   There is nothing that belongs to me.
   What is there that I could call "I"?
   What is the thing we call "mine"?
   What is the thing we call "I"?
   You have become sweet nectar for me to drink up my life
   like water that is completely vaporized by hot iron.
   3887 eṉakku ārā amutāy eṉatu āviyai iṉ uyirai
   maṉakku ārāmai maṉṉi uṇṭiṭṭāy iṉi uṇṭoḻiyāy
   puṉak kāyā niṟatta puṇṭarīkak kaṇ ceṅkaṉivāy
   uṉakku ēṟkum kōla malarppāvaikku aṉpā eṉ aṉpēyō (6)
   3887. You are sweet nectar to me.
   You are my soul and you stay as my sweet life and fill my heart.
   You must not go away from me.
   You have the color of a kaayam flower.
   You have lotus eyes and a red fruit-like mouth.
   You are the beloved of Lakshmi whose form is beautiful
   and you love her.
   You are my dear one.
   3888 kōla malarppāvaikku aṉpu ākiya eṉ aṉpēyō
   nīla varai iraṇṭu piṟai kavvi nimirntatu oppa
   kōla varākam oṉṟāy nilam kōṭṭiṭaik koṇṭa entāy
   nīlak kaṭal kaṭaintāy uṉṉai peṟṟu iṉip pōkkuvaṉō? (7)
   3888. You are my dear one
   and you are the beloved of Lakshmi whose form is beautiful.
   As a lovely boar that was like a blue mountain
   you carried the earth with two tusks
   that were like two crescent moons.
   You are my father.
   You churned the blue milky ocean.
   I have received you—how could I leave you.
   3889 peṟṟu iṉip pōkkuvaṉō uṉṉai eṉ taṉip pēruyirai?
   uṟṟa iruviṉai āy uyir āy payaṉ āyavai āy
   muṟṟa im mūvulakum perum tūṟu āy tūṟṟil pukku
   muṟṟak karantu oḷittāy eṉ mutal taṉi vittēyō (8)
   3889. You are my dear life.
   I have you—how could I leave you?
   You give both kinds of karma to the creatures of the world.
   You are the life of the world.
   You create the lives in all the three worlds.
   You are inside the world and no one knows where you are.
   You are the unique seed, the origin of everything.
   3890 mutal taṉi vittēyō muḻu mūvulaku ātikku ellām
   mutal taṉi uṉṉai uṉṉai eṉai nāḷ vantu kūṭuvaṉ nāṉ
   mutal taṉi aṅkum iṅkum muḻumuṟṟuṟu vāḻ pāḻāy
   mutal taṉi cūḻntu akaṉṟu āḻntu uyarnta muṭivilī ō! (9)
   3890. You are the first ancient seed of the world.
   You are the first one of all the three worlds.
   O matchless god, when will I come and join you?
   Souls wander here and there and waste their lives,
   but you are the unique one and spread everywhere
   among the deep, wide, high places—you are endless.
   3891 cūḻntu akaṉṟu āḻntu uyarnta muṭivil perum pāḻē ō
   cūḻntu ataṉil periya para nal malarc cōtī ō
   cūḻntu ataṉil periya cuṭar ñāṉa iṉpamē ō
   cūḻntu ataṉil periya eṉ avā aṟac cūḻntāyē (10)
   3891. You are omnipresent and endless.
   You are a divine beautiful flower
   and a light, giving fragrance and brightness everywhere.
   You are the pleasure of bright knowledge
   that spreads everywhere.
   You are everywhere—
   you came to me and removed my desires and joined me.
   3892 avā aṟac cūḻ ariyai ayaṉai araṉai alaṟṟi
   avā aṟṟu vīṭu peṟṟa kurukūrc caṭakōpaṉ coṉṉa
   avā il antātikaḷāl ivai āyiramum muṭinta
   avā il antāti ip pattu aṟintār piṟantār uyarntē (11)
   3892. Saḍagopan composed a thousand andaadi pasurams
   and received moksha because he had no desire.
   He said, "You are omnipresent and have taken away my desires.
   You are Brahma. You are Shiva and you are Hari."
   If devotees learn and recite these ten pasurams,
   they will reach the gods in the sky
   even though they were born in this world.
   -------------
   SUBHAM - Nammaazhvaree saraṇam.
   ----------------
     __________________________________________________________________

   This file was last updated on 20 Sept. 2015
   Feel free to send corrections to the Webmaster.
