                                 [pmdr0.gif]
                     ___________________________________

                     ampalavāṇak kavirāyaravarkaḷ
              pāṭiya "caturakiri aṟappaḷīcura catakam"
                āṅkila moḻipeyarppu : kaucalyā hārṭ

                         "aRappaLIswarar catakam" of
                            ampalavANa kavirAyar
                     English Translation: Kausalya Hart
                    In tamil script, unicode/utf-8 format
                     ___________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   Acknowledgements:
       Our Sincere thanks go to the author of the English Translation, Dr.
       Kausalya Hart
       for the kind permission to include this (unpublished) work as part
       of the Project Madurai etext collections.
       We thank also Prof. George Hart for his assistance in the
       preparation of this etext.
       Preparation of HTML and PDF versions: Dr. K. Kalyanasundaram,
       Lausanne, Switzerland.
       © Project Madurai, 1998-2018.
       Project Madurai is an open, voluntary, worldwide initiative devoted
       to preparation
       of electronic texts of tamil literary works and to distribute them
       free on the Internet.
       Details of Project Madurai are available at the website
       [1]http://www.projectmadurai.org/
       You are welcome to freely distribute this file, provided this
       header page is kept intact.
     __________________________________________________________________

                          "aRappaLIsura catakam" of
                            ampalavANa kavirAyar
                   English Translation by : Kausalya Hart
    Retired Lecurer, University of California, Berkeley, California, USA

       Source of the Translation:
       ampalavāṇak kavirāyaravarkaḷ
       pāṭiya "caturakiri aṟappaḷīcura catakam"
       tiru.pulavar ‘aracu’ avarkaḷ iyaṟṟiya uraiyuṭaṉ
       tirunelvēli, teṉṉintiya
       caivacittānta nuṟpatippuk kaḻakam, limiṭeṭ
       ceṉṉai - 1 , tirunelvēli - 6 maturai - 1 kōvai - 1
       4m patippu, ceṉṉai, julai 1980
       ------------
       aṟappaḷīcura catakam pākkaḷ tamiḻil inta miṉpatippiṉ muṭivil
       koṭukkappaṭṭuḷḷatu.
       ------------

                 English Translation of aRappaLIsura catakam
                              by Kauslaya Hart
       The praise of God
       The elephant-faced Lord Ganesa
       protects his devotees and gives them joy.
       I worship him to give me the grace
       to compose a hundred poems
       with excellent meanings on the god of the gods,
       our lord Aṛappuḷeesurar.
       ---------
       1. The troubles of life
       It is difficult to be born a human in the seven births
       that a soul takes on this earth surrounded by the oceans.
       It is much harder to be born in a high community
       that has good culture and good traditions.
       Even harder is to be born without disabilities.
       Even if one is born with no troubles in life,
       it is hard to know what is virtue and sin
       and live without doing any mistake.
       It is hard to be born rich
       and it is harder to be born with compassion in one’s heart.
       It is even harder to be born in the wide world
       as a devotee who worships your feet.
       O lord, you are nectar for your devotees.
       You are the god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri.
       Our dear king Madaveḷ, the son of the king Mozai,
       worships you in his heart every day.
       2. A good wife
       A good wife speaks and behaves sweetly to her husband,
       looks as lovely as Lakshmi on her lotus.
       She does not get angry
       and has the four excellent qualities of a woman—
       shyness, innocence, fear and modesty.
       She knows how to treat her in-laws with respect,
       receives guests with happiness and takes care of them,
       and she comes from a respectable family whose people are without
       disease.
       She is attractive and as beautiful as Rathi, the goddess of love.
       She is chaste, does nothing against her husband’s wishes,
       does not love anyone except her husband and has children.
       O god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       3. A good son
       A good son gives charity just as his ancestors did,
       keeps the honor and fame of his family,
       gives food and other things to the poor,
       does good deeds for others, performs yoga,
       obeys and worships his parents and teachers, never opposing them,
       follows the good paths of his parents,
       and prays to the gods according to his family tradition.
       He has sweet qualities, skills, good judgment, generosity,
       and lives on the moral path of life.
       To have such a good son, parents must have done good karma.
       O lord, you, our light, remove our troubles.
       O god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear just king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       4. Brothers and sisters
       The Vedas says that this is the way a person should behave with his
       sisters and brothers—
       He should consider his wealth the same as theirs
       and think that his fame and their fame are the same
       and their disgrace is his disgrace.
       He should think that the benefit of their penance is his
       and his life is their life.
       Even though snakes have five mouths and eat with all of them,
       the food they eat goes to one stomach.
       Just like that, all one’s brothers should live together feeling
       they are one.
       O lord with feet that look like red lotuses
       because you dance all the time,
       you are the god Aṛappuḷeesurar in Saduragiri
       and our dear chief Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       5. A good Teacher
       A good teacher
       is a scholar of the sciences and arts
       and knows how to teach Vedantha and Siddhantha.
       He has good moral qualities, is strong, truthful to all,
       knows yoga, yogic practices, spells,
       and the shastras of other religions.
       He follows the paths of philosophy,
       lives without desire and attachment to worldly things,
       and spends his life in peace and happiness.
       O lord, you, the everlasting joy for all, are matchless,
       you are faultless and the life and support of all creatures.
       O god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our beloved king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       6. A good Student
       He serves his teacher always and never gets upset
       even if the teacher becomes angry, scolds him, treats him cruelly
       and never appreciates him.
       Falling at the lotus feet of his guru, he should say,
       “You are truly my father and mother, you are faultless,
       all my body and wealth are yours, I worship you,”
       and he should listen to his teacher’s advice.
       The duty of a good student is to receive his guru’s grace
       that removes the results of his karma.
       O lord Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       you burned the three forts of your enemies.
       Our dear chief Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       7. The good life
       People should obtain wealth only by doing virtuous deeds,
       they should protect their wealth
       and increase it a hundred times through their cleverness,
       eat healthy food and wear decent clothes and ornaments.
       They should help elders, poets and the poor,
       earn good fame, do charity on this earth,
       and search for the good path to moksha.
       If people hide their wealth and do not give,
       they are blind and do not know what a good path is.
       O lord Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our king, the son of king Mozhai,
       the chief of the Ganga dynasty,
       worships you in his heart every day.
       8. What one should not do
       One should not make friends with bad people,
       go to the houses of unkind people,
       argue with anyone,
       stay with unwise people,
       do evil deeds,
       blame others,
       flirt with women,
       gossip,
       go near poisonous snakes,
       go out alone at night,
       try to swim a flooding river,
       forget doing good deeds,
       or speak in front of the king without fear.
       O lord Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       9. Virtue
       A woman from a good family is a virtue for a good house,
       children are wealth for a good wife,
       and education is important for children.
       To be praised by the world is important for scholars
       and good knowledge is needed for the wise.
       If one wants to have a good life,
       he should increase his knowledge,
       do pure tapas, be a good person, help others,
       do penance, have patience, obey and respect his elders,
       and do service for others.
       If one wants to be worthy,
       he should have good qualities, love and compassion.
       O lord, when the milky ocean was churned, poison came out of it,
       and Vishnu, Brahma, and all the gods, sages, the sun, the moon
       and the stars worshiped you and asked you to protect them.
       You drank the poison that came from the milky ocean
       and saved all the gods.
       O lord Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       10. Useless things
       A city without a temple,
       a face without a nose,
       a wife without a husband,
       skills that do not give good results,
       flowers without fragrance,
       an army without elephants,
       fields without guards to protect them,
       houses without children,
       the sky without the moon or sun,
       an assembly without scholars,
       music without rhythm,
       a country without a king to protect it,
       wealth that is not given away,
       prayer without austerities,
       food without enough salt,
       and women without love.
       What is the use of all these things?
       O lord, you share your body with Shakthi, dear as your life.
       You are Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri
       and our king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       11. Lord, why you do these things?
       O faultless lord, why do you do these things?
       You give wealth to stingy people,
       give poverty to generous, helpful people,
       give unwise men wives as chaste as Arundhati
       and give cruel wives to good, peaceful husbands.
       You make some people be born in good families
       but then make them go to mean people and praise them.
       You make the best poets compose poetry for people
       who do not know the virtue of Tamil.
       Tell us, lord, why do you do these things
       and not help good people?
       O faultless lord, god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       12. A useless person
       A useless person speaks incoherently in the assembly
       even though he has learned many arts,
       runs away like a coward on the battlefield
       when an enemy warrior comes at him with a sword,
       brings a false case, argues for it and is disgraced by others,
       lives with a wife who loves another man,
       flatters himself when others do not praise him,
       and loves courtesans and leaves his wife.
       O faultless lord,
       remove the troubles and the poverty of all
       and give them your grace.
       O lord, god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       13. What one should do in life
       One should become educated when young,
       act according to what one has learned,
       cross the oceans to earn wealth and perform charity with it,
       make friendship with good people without ever abandoning them,
       learn many good Tamil songs,
       give money to good poets,
       do much charity feeding the poor of the world,
       and worship the feet of our beloved god,
       performing many pujas with devotion.
       O faultless lord,
       you stay under the banyan tree.
       You have a dark neck,
       your forehead is decorated with ash
       and you are everything in the world.
       O lord, god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       14. Godlike people
       Living without begging from others makes one clever,
       helping and protecting others brings praise and fame,
       giving gold without limit to others
       makes one like incomparable Indra, the king of gods,
       guarding a thousand people on the earth and protecting them
       makes one like Brahma,
       protecting and taking care of ten thousand people who help others
       makes one worshiped as if he were lovely-eyed Thirumal,
       and helping others even more than that makes one like the great
       Shiva.
       O lord, you have Parvathi whose hair is fragrant and dark,
       as half of your body.
       You are the god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri
       and our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       15. The Impossible
       A person might walk on water,
       eat bitter vegetables,
       make fire cool as water,
       embrace a large tiger,
       wear a long snake,
       cook sand like rice,
       stop arrows and bullets from hitting him,
       make a heavenly statue speak,
       churn vinegar to make butter,
       but no one can change the mind of stupid people.
       O lord with a head adorned with a kondrai garland
       you are faultless, worshiped by the gods,
       the god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri.
       Our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       16. Good deeds
       Remembering the help that others have done,
       forgetting bad deeds done by others,
       not falling in love with others’ wives even if they are wealthy,
       finding and giving back something another has lost,
       nourishing the charity that another has performed in the world,
       not giving false witness even for crores of rupees,
       and, even if one might lose one’s head, not lying even in dreams.
       The world says that these people are good people
       and live happily on this world.
       O dear lord, god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       17. Wonderful deeds
       If someone takes care of refugees and the poor, he is a wonderful
       man,
       if he is strong and does not worry whether he loses or gains in
       war,
       he is a great warrior,
       if he refuses to hear gossip, he is like Meru mountain,
       if he relieves the troubles of others and protects them he is a
       sacrificer.
       if he understand other’s abilities and respects them, he is smart,
       and if he does not fail in his promises he is like a great king.
       O faultless lord with a trident,
       this world is a playground for you.
       You are the god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri
       and our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       18. Mean people
       Lustful people do not have good manners,
       courtesans do not feel shy,
       bad people do not have dignity,
       thieves are not afraid of darkness,
       young prostitutes do not have shame,
       a person with no one to depend on has no way of surviving,
       those who are not great are egotistic,
       ungenerous people are not praised by anyone,
       mean people do not tell the truth
       and people without wealth do not have anything.
       O lord with a neck as dark as the midnight,
       god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       19. Impermanence
       The body is a wonder that will disappear,
       life is a flood that flows like a forest river,
       and children, relatives, a house and wife all are joys
       that will vanish like a mirage.
       Strength of arms, braveness, youth and beauty
       all are like the heat of the morning sun and will disappear.
       Life itself is a lamp kept in the brightness of the sun
       on open ground where no one can see it.
       I should not live thinking these things are permanent.
       Give me your grace—
       I want only to worship your feet with love,
       sprinkling flowers and water on them in the morning and evening.
       All wise men worship the feet of you,
       the teacher of knowledge to all.
       Give me your grace, O faultless lord,
       god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri.
       Our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       20. The Abodes of Lakshmi
       Lakshmi with long dark hair and thulasi garlands who rides an
       elephant stays in these places—
       in the faces of good women,
       in the palaces of kings,
       in the beautiful homes of cultured people,
       on a lotus blossom,
       under the shadow of a vilva tree,
       in the ocean,
       on blooming creepers,
       at the front entrance of a wedding home,
       in a guarded city,
       in a field where good crops grow,
       in a lamp that shines brightly,
       in a beautiful conch,
       in the words of good people,
       with people who do not lie,
       on a lotus in a pond,
       and in a milk pot.
       O lord, god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       21. The goddess of ill fortune
       The goddess of ill fortune stays with those who—
       Eat without limit,
       speak too much,
       tell lies,
       do evil deeds,
       wear old clothes as if they are poor,
       stay in the house of a woman who gets very angry
       and does not want to be friendly with anyone.
       The goddess of ill fortune also stays
       in a dirty pot,
       among a group of donkeys,
       among a group of goats,
       and in the sorrowful faces of people.
       O god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       the beloved of the beautiful daughter of Himavan,
       our dear king Madaveḷ, the king of Mozhai,
       worships you in his heart every day.
       22. Useless things
       What is the use of —
       A flourishing murungai tree that does not give fruit,
       a barking dog that does not give milk,
       a red murukkam flower without fragrance,
       the tasteless salty ocean whether black or white,
       a flourishing surakkāy plant that cannot be used for food,
       and people, whether rich or poor, who do not help others.
       O ancient lord adorned with lovely kondrai garlands,
       Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       23. Faultless things
       Sandalwood does not lose its fragrance even if it cut,
       milk that is boiled for a long time does not lose its sweet taste,
       a precious jewel that becomes dirty does not lose it’s value,
       gold that is melted in fire does not lose its worth,
       the sun and moon do not lose their brightness
       even when dark clouds hide them,
       and the value of educated people is always appreciated by the world
       even though mean people may not understand their wisdom.
       O lord, you do not abandon intelligent people.
       O god of Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       24. Helping
       This world helps the gods, ancestors, the sun, moon, stars
       and the three gods, Shiva, Vishnu and Brahma
       because its people worship them.
       Good kings help and nurture their citizens.
       Good citizens and the army help their garlanded king.
       The rain helps crops grow
       and the crops in the fields feed the people.
       Elders say that the chastity of good women,
       the justice of kings and the morality of Brahmins
       make the rain fall.
       You are our chief and you carry a long bull banner,
       O lord Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri.
       Our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       25. Happiness
       Children feel happy when they see their parents happy,
       beautiful alli blossoms in ponds bloom when the moon comes out,
       lotus flowers bloom and flourish when they see the rising sun.
       peacocks are happy and dance when they see rain clouds,
       the poor feel joy when they see generous people,
       and the whole country is happy when it has a famous and just king.
       O faultless lord with jaṭa as red as the evening sky,
       god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       26. Things with faults
       Friendship with people who talk sweetly but do not really love you,
       food served without love,
       crops grown by hired labor that languish,
       an army that goes to battle without a captain,
       love for a woman who does not love in return,
       and the life of someone who borrows too much money from others,
       O ancient god praised by all the gods,
       your compassion never grows less.
       O lord, Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       27. Ignorant people
       If a crazed monkey drunk on toddy as if it were a devil
       is bitten by a scorpion and falls into thick bush,
       will it survive and find a good path in life?
       In the same way if a young, ignorant person, born in a low caste,
       attains even a slightly high status,
       even in dreams he will not have good knowledge, good qualities,
       uprightness, forbearance, respect for elders and a charitable mind.
       O generous lord, you are the meaning of the famous Vedas,
       the god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri.
       Our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       28. True elders, friends, gurus and relatives
       If someone finishes for you the work you could not finish on time,
       he is your elder brother.
       If someone helps when you are in trouble
       he is your father and mother.
       If someone helps when enemies attack you, he is a godlike friend.
       If someone gives you good advice and tells your future, he is your
       guru.
       If someone thinks of your happiness and sorrow as his own, he is
       your good relative.
       If someone knows your thoughts and acts according to your wishes,
       he is your son.
       O lord adorned always with a garland of anaaram and a snake around
       your neck,
       god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       29. Good qualities
       Good manners is to love your parents in your heart and be
       compassionate to them,
       obedience is to speak to your guru with respect and pray to god,
       sweetness is talk with your lovely dark-eyed wife in your bedroom,
       goodness is to be compassionate and show generosity to your wise
       elders,
       the right way to live is to follow your king’s orders,
       love is to be kind to your relatives
       and hatred is what should be shown to your enemies.
       Manu’s book of rules for life says that these are good things for
       everyone.
       O lord Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       30. Kali Yuga
       In Kaliyuga people praise bad poets but not good ones,
       are hospitable to bad people but do not help the suffering,
       do not worship good deities but worship evil gods,
       do not respect their own father and mother,
       go to prostitutes and fall at their feet,
       and do not talk to their relatives who helped them when they were
       in trou-ble
       but show hospitality to guests who praise them.
       This is how people behave in Kali Yuga.
       O lord Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       31. Recognizing others
       One knows an educated person by how he speaks,
       a chaste woman by how she looks at others,
       a saint by how he controls himself,
       a devil-like person by his bad actions,
       a plant’s ability to grow by how quickly the tender leaves shoot
       out from it,
       a hero by his bravery,
       and a person’s family by his behavior.
       O lord, god of Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our beloved king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       32. Uniting together
       If many join together, they can tie up a strong elephant with a
       rope of grass,
       if many drops become a river, they can fill a lake or a pond,
       if many soft threads come together, they can make a beautiful
       dress,
       if someone puts together a cloth and a long stick he can make an
       um-brella,
       if rice is covered with husk it becomes paddy that is planted as
       seeds,
       and if people live together with understanding, they become
       successful in life.
       O faultless lord, the god Brahma could make a fallen fruit rejoin
       its branch,
       but even he could not find your head.
       O god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       33. Success
       Actors achieve success if they speak sweetly,
       lecherous people find success if they are rich,
       doctors gain success by giving good medicine,
       a courtesan is successful if she is beautiful,
       a heroic king achieves fame if he fights well,
       sages gain fame in the world if they have patience,
       Vedic priests are respected if they are born in good families,
       merchants find fame if they use their scales accurately,
       faultless farmers grow good paddy if they plow their fields well,
       and a horse is good if it can run fast.
       O lord Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       34. Necessity
       If someone does not chew betel leaves after a meal,
       his face will resemble the moon with its dark spot,
       if good people do not live in a large city, it is empty,
       if a country is not ruled by a good king it will be destroyed,
       if a beautiful house is without good sons, it is empty,
       if an assembly lacks intelligent and courageous scholars, it is
       useless,
       and if a land does not have wealthy people it will be destroyed.
       O lord, you gave your grace to the world
       by giving Ganesa and Guhan to it.
       O lord, god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       35. Ignorant people
       Listen, these are the things ignorant people do—
       they ask advice from their wives,
       tell others the faults of their parents,
       come before an assembly and speak incoherently,
       do stupid deeds that make their relatives mock them,
       help friends who do not really love them
       and later suffer because of it,
       and grow angry at beggars as if they were blind bulls.
       Yet all of these are better than people who are not educated.
       O lord who went as a messenger for the poet Sundarar, your friend,
       O god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       36. Needs
       Even a smart person needs to ask advice from others,
       even a strong warrior needs an army with him,
       even a scholar needs to ask help from other educated people,
       even a king who rules the world under one umbrella needs a smart
       minister in his palace,
       even a good musician needs someone to play the drone,
       and even a bright lamp needs a stick to prod the wick.
       O lord, white as a conch, with a third eye on your forehead,
       god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       37. Poverty
       Things that are useless without wealth—
       Being born in a high caste,
       being learned in all skills,
       having a good, beautiful wife,
       being respected by others,
       speaking with words sweet as milk,
       having orthodox manners,
       and possessing heroism and wisdom.
       Whatever one may have, if he does not have wealth,
       even his mother will grow tired of him,
       his relatives will disgrace him,
       all will speak of him without respect
       and even his wife will vilify him.
       O dear lord who drank poison to save the gods,
       you are everything.
       O god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       38. Meanness
       It is bad to be a beggar,
       but refusing to give anything to a beggar is worse.
       Telling a person not to give is stupid,
       but promising to give and not giving is worse.
       Promising to help people but not doing so is bad.
       Speaking sweetly to those who need help
       but making them come again and again
       and finally refusing to give anything to them
       is the act of the cruelest sinner in the world.
       You are the beloved of Uma whose lips are like red petals,
       you are nectar for the poor.
       O god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       39. Not to be revealed
       People should not tell these things about themselves to others—
       their date of birth, their troubles,
       truths about fate that may hurt others,
       the medicine that they take,
       the mantra given by their guru,
       troubles that have led to their disgrace,
       charity that they have given,
       their staying with a woman who is ornamented with precious gold,
       the fame and respect they have received,
       their thoughts, their sicknesses,
       and that they have no food to eat.
       O lord with a dark neck,
       beloved of Uma, the mother of all the three worlds,
       god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       40. The age of the gods and heavenly things
       The Caturayuga lasts for 2000 years.
       For Brahma who has four faces 2000 years is only one day.
       In this 2000 years, fourteen Indras will appear and go away.
       When Brahma lives for a hundred years and disappears,
       that is called a karpam.
       O lord, god of gods and king of the gods,
       if a crore of karpams passes, it is only one day for Thirumal.
       If one crore of Thirumals are born and disappear,
       that is the time you take to shake your head and laugh once.
       O lord, you share half of your body with Shakti.
       O god, Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       41. Beauty
       A horse’s beauty is revealed in its face,
       the beauty of Vedic scholars, in their lotus feet.
       the beauty of a shining mirror, in its surface,
       the beauty of a cow, on its back,
       and the beauty of good women and young girls after puberty shines
       all over their bodies.
       The beauty of copper, silver, bell metal, iron, gold and white lead
       appears when they are cleaned by tamarind, sunnam, saazmbal, sand,
       taadu and cow dung.
       You are the lord of Himalaya mountain, you carry a strong bow,
       and you are the life of all,
       O lord, god of Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri.
       Our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       42. Control
       A strong, vicious bull is controlled with a rope,
       a rutting elephant is controlled by a goad,
       a poisonous snake is calmed by playing music,
       a galloping horse is mastered by the bit,
       people evil as poison are mastered by whipping them,
       and the anger of people is controlled by wise people with their
       wisdom.
       O dear lord whose devotees bow to your beautiful lotus feet,
       god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       .
       43. Light
       A ruby has its brightness in its deep red color,
       a red firefly is brighter than a ruby,
       a lamp is brighter than a firefly,
       a torch gives more light than a lamp,
       firecrackers are brighter than a torch
       and the cool moon gives more light than firecrackers.
       Intelligent people say that both the brightness of the sun
       and the fame of just kings, victorious heroes
       and wise people spread in all directions.
       You conquered the handsome Madan
       and burned him with your third eye.
       O god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       44. Good things becoming bad
       If passionate men and thieves look at the moon,
       it become poison for them,
       if courtesans see a rich chief of a village, it is poisonous for
       him,
       if sick people eat very tasty food,
       it may not agree with them and be poisonous for them.
       if a miser sees good artists, it is poisonous for him
       because he worries he may have to give them money,
       if a poor poet goes to an assembly of good poets,
       he will worry because he will not be able to speak with them,
       and if sinners think of good deeds, it is poisonous for them.
       O lord, you stay in the hearts of the sages and yogis
       that are as pure as the Vedas.
       O god of Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       45. Admirable acts
       If great people do something, whether it is good or bad
       it is acceptable,
       when a woman who is loved by someone
       does something either out of love or sadness, it is good for the
       lover,
       when a poor person gives much charity it is praised by all,
       when someone receives a wound on a battlefield, it is good,
       when someone climbs on an elephant or falls from it,
       people think it is great,
       and when someone climbs on a dog and falls off it,
       onlookers think it is funny,
       O dear lord, you give your grace to devotees
       who keep you in their hearts.
       O god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       46. Good karma
       King Sibi protected the dove that came to him for refuge,
       Harichandran is praised by the world for telling the truth,
       Mahabali gave the boon that Vishnu asked without hesitation,
       Rama obeyed his father’s wish,
       Lakshmana followed his elder brother Rama to the forest,
       Parasurama removed the curses of his ancestors,
       Garuda helped his relatives,
       Siruthondar hurt his son for Shiva,
       Kannappar covered Shiva’s eyes with his sandals,
       Prahladan fought with his father to show him Vishnu is god
       and Vibhishana told the plans of his brother Ravana to Rama
       so Rama could kill him.
       All these were good people even though they did bad deeds.
       O lord, god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       47. Bad Karma
       These are people who lost their lives or fame
       because of their bad karma—
       Daskhan became angry, fought with Shiva and lost his life,
       the Asuran Padmasuran danced with Vishnu and lost his head,
       Indra fell in love with Ahalya, the wife of Rishi Gauthama,
       and was covered with thousand eyes all over his body,
       Duriyodhana refused to give property to his cousins the five
       Pandavas
       and lost everything in battle.
       The one who disgraced his elders had his head replaced with an
       elephant’s head and wandered.
       and Duryodhana disgraced Krishna in the assembly,
       lost his kingdom and died.
       O lord, all wise men and gods worship your feet,
       O god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri.
       Our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       48. A good town
       A good town has ponds, wells, a river,
       a mountain nearby, banana and kamugu trees,
       coconut trees, good paddy lands, irrigation channels,
       and lakes blooming with kāvi flowers, lotus and kuvaḷai flowers.
       It has many wonderful communities such as merchants
       and Vedic scholars.
       The king of that land is good and protects his citizens.
       It has beautiful temples, dancers, singers, rich palaces
       and good people.
       If people there have a good life and happiness,
       one can say it is the door of heaven.
       O god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       49. A bad town
       A bad town is where mean people from low families live.
       Its houses have broken thorn fences in front of them,
       its women walk on the streets with uncombed hair,
       it is surrounded by forests and mountains
       where bitter thorn muraikkai plants grow,
       thieves wander around always,
       and its wells have no bucket or rope to draw water.
       It is better to be in hell than to stay in such a place.
       O god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       50. Taking an oil bath
       If one takes an oil bath—
       on Sunday, it removes one’s beauty.
       on Monday, it brings wealth,
       on Tuesday, it brings trouble,
       on Wednesday, it makes one smart,
       on Thursday, it makes one unwise and takes away one’s wealth,
       and on Friday and Saturday it gives long life.
       But there is a remedy for this:
       people say if when they take an oil bath,
       they mix the oil with various good herbs,
       it nullifies the bad things that could happen in the week.
       O lord, god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       51. A good doctor
       A good doctor should know the right time for his patient to take
       herbal medicines,
       the condition of his patient,
       should have read the medicinal of Tanvantiri, Kumbamuni, Kongaṇar
       and the Cithar,
       and know the power of the different types of medicines
       and how to use them.
       He should be acquainted with herbs like maṇḍura centhura laksham
       and the famous kuṇavakadam and the cures that they give,
       and he should know how to use good oils and ointments.
       He should know what type of disease the patient has
       and be learned in all the books of ayurvedic medicine
       so that he can give medicine that is as good as nectar.
       O lord, god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       52. Knowing the truth
       The stars and astrology do not tell lies.
       If the medicines given by a doctor cure sickness, they are good.
       The way one lives a good or bad life shows
       whether he did tapas in previous births.
       Good religious books prove whether Vishnu is the god of gods.
       The mantras Rudram, namagam and jamagam prove
       whether Shiva is the greatest god.
       O lord, I am your slave and it is your duty to protect me.
       I do archana for you and worship your feet every day.
       O chief, lord of the Vedas, god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       53. Karma gives everything in life
       If someone has a clear mind, wealth, wisdom,
       education, compassion, progress, good looks, enjoyment,
       a sacrificing mind, a lovely beautiful wife,
       heroism that cannot be overcome by anyone,
       patience, skills, manliness and sweet words,
       that is all because of the good karma that his soul has done.
       If someone wishes to get these qualities by emulating others, it
       will not happen.
       Even if the bitter vegetable vembu does tapas for a long time,
       and wishes to become sweet like a rasthali mango, it will fail.
       O lord decorated with a garland of kondrai blossoms,
       god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       54. No one can escape fate
       A person may be able to—
       measure the oceans,
       describe the forms of Vishnu, Brahma and other gods,
       measure any part of the world,
       know the conditions of his body,
       control his breath,
       do many types of yoga and other exercises,
       jump high into the sky,
       even make one think that someone is god,
       and know all the eight siddhis,
       but still he cannot escape when the results of his karma.
       O lord Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       55. The highest of all
       Many scholars who have learned many books say this—
       There is no caste higher than the Brahmins,
       the scholars of the Vedas,
       no higher mountain than the Himalayas,
       no better river on earth than the Ganges that flows with white
       roaring waves,
       nothing wiser than the rishis who performed much tapas,
       nothing hotter than fire,
       no gods higher than good fathers and mothers,
       no religious books better than the Vedas,
       no better language than the ancient northern language,
       and no higher charity than feeding people.
       O dear lord worshiped by the sun, Brahma,
       the gods in the sky and rishis,
       god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       56. Useless people
       Useless people are those who—
       Love someone else’s wife,
       talk of useless things with others,
       hide food from guests,
       do not want to study,
       compose poems only about those who give them money,
       carry another person on their back for a job,
       are uneducated and unable to do anything,
       and spend more money than their income.
       O faultless lord are adorned with a snake,
       I wander uselessly, yet you, dancer in Thillai,
       gave me your grace.
       O lord, god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       57. Things that need support—
       Without help to support them, these things may not survive—
       A home where only young people live without elders,
       a city not protected by a strong fort,
       a country without a good king and good language spoken by people,
       a poem that does not have rhyme,
       a flower garden without guards,
       a lake that does not have good banks,
       a skill that one has learned with mistakes,
       clarity without a basis in proper exposition,
       dancers not praised by other experienced dancers,
       and a tall tree with many branches that is close to a flooding
       river.
       O lord, god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       58. Good qualities.
       If someone always tells the truth and has good qualities
       does he need to go around the temple with flowers?
       If he leads a good life without stealing or killing
       does he need to do charity that is praised by others?
       If he has removed passion and miserliness from his heart,
       does he need to do good acts of charity?
       If he has a pure mind, does he need to take a bath in a river?
       O lord, if someone worships your true devotees,
       does he need to bow to your feet?
       If someone worships the Brahmins, does he need to do archana for
       the gods in the sky?
       You are the god of Aiyāṛu, Kamalai, Chonachalam and Thillai,
       O lord, god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri.
       Our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       59. Fame
       Only one in ten speaks well in an assembly and is appreciated.
       Only one in a hundred sings better than all in a assembly.
       Only one in thousand can sing and tell a story excellently,
       and anyone who appreciates them is one among ten thousand
       while only one among a lakh really understands the stories and
       appreciate the songs in their hearts.
       Only one of the faultless devotees among crores worships the lord
       all three times of the day.
       O god Ekambaranathar of Kāsi, the whole world praises you.
       You are the lord of Kailāsam, Kuzumam, Vināsi, Ērur, Veṇkāḍu,
       Chengāḍu, and Kāḷathi.
       O god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       60. The power of chastity
       All people of the world praise these chaste women—
       Ahalya, the wife of the rishi Gauthama, who cursed her to became a
       stone because she loved Indra,
       Anusya who cursed the sun and kept it from rising at dawn to save
       her husband,
       Sita who went into the fire to prove her chastity to Rama,
       Chandramati, wife of Harichandra who went with him to the forest
       and helped him,
       Draupadi, the wife of the Paṇḍavas, who took a vow to kill
       all the Kauravas
       and Nalayini, the wife of Rishi Mandaviyar,
       who took her husband in a basket to a prostitute’s house.
       O ancient lord, god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       61. New clothes
       If one wears new clothes—
       on Sundays the clothes shine in the bright sun,
       on Mondays the clothes will get wet in the rain and spoil,
       on Tuesdays the clothes will be torn in a few days,
       on Wednesdays, those who wear new clothes will be victorious,
       on Thursdays, those who wear new clothes
       will look handsome and get more new clothes,
       and on Fridays those who wear new clothes will have a good life and
       their wealth will increase.
       O faultless lord, you shine in the form described by the Vedas and
       Aga-mas.
       O ancient lord, god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       62. Travelers
       According to the shastras,
       if a traveller sees these things going from right to left,
       it is good luck and he will be successful in all his actions:
       powerful eagles, monkeys, snakes, rats, pig, a mongoose,
       deer, mice, owls that screech all night, bears that are hard to
       control,
       forest cats, tigers and forked-tongue lizards.
       If one starts to travel and hears someone saying, “Do not go,”
       he will get a headache, muscle pains and continuous sneezing on the
       way and suffer.
       O faultless lord, you are praised by elders,
       O god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       63. Good fortune for a traveler.
       If a traveler sees these coming in front of him,
       it is good fortune for him:
       a fox, a peacock, a green parrot, a hen, a heron, a crow,
       a naali, a chichili, an oondi, a naraiyaan, a cempothu,
       a buffalo, Brahmins, a tiger, and a rabbit.
       It is also good luck for him if he hears someone calling, the sound
       of a conch,
       the sound of a king’s drum beating, or the sound of a bell ringing.
       You shine like the rising sun in the morning,
       O god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri.
       Our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       64. A traveler’s luck
       If these things come in front of a traveler when he starts, it is
       bad luck for him:
       a single Brahmin, a sage, a beggar, a goldsmith, a women without
       orna-ments,
       people carrying grass or firewood, a bald man, a potter with a pot
       and an oil merchant,
       but it is good luck if these come in front of him:
       people carrying water pots, a basket with dried cow dung, fruits,
       Brahmins who give food to others, Sumangali women, potatoes,
       a pregnant woman, a washerman with his bundle of clothes,
       a milk pot, bangle sellers, and flower sellers.
       O lord, you are adorned with a snake
       and the Ganges flows on your head,
       god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       65. Foods one should not eat
       The ancient shastras say that the following are not suitable food
       for good people—
       milk that you buy, milk that is kept for children,
       milk that is not boiled, mushrooms,
       the vegetables murungkai and surai,
       leftover rice, burned rice, spinach, peerkathi,
       white salt, sugar from a coconut tree, garlic, white eggplant,
       and the leftover food that is thrown away from a Shiva temple.
       Eating in the darkness is not good.
       O faultless lord, the gods in the sky
       and the sages who have controlled their senses worship you.
       O god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       66. Flaws
       The flaw of the famous Ganges is the foam that floats on it,
       the flaw of the white shining crescent moon is its black dot in the
       middle of it,
       the fault of the rishi who does powerful tapas is anger,
       the fault of a king is that he goes to fight with an enemy without
       knowing his strength,
       the fault of beggars is to ask alms from a miser,
       and a good sugarcane juice becomes bitter
       if someone puts his fingers into it.
       O bright lord, the four Vedas that search for you were not able to
       find you.
       O god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       67. A new house
       It is good to dig a foundation for a new house
       or to enter a new house in the following months:
       Chitrai, Vaikasi, Avani, Aipasi, Karthigai and Thai.
       The following are not good months to dig a foundation
       or to enter a house:
       Ani, Adi, Purattasi, Markazhi, Aasi and Punguni,
       and that is because
       in Ani Shiva burned the three forts of the Raksasas,
       in Adi Seetha was kidnapped by Ravana,
       in Purattasi Hiraṇya was defeated by Vishnu,
       in Markazhi, the Mahabharata war began,
       in Masi Shiva drank the poison that came out of the milky ocean
       and in Punguni Shiva burnt Manmadan.
       O god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       68. Guests
       On Sundays even enemies receive guests happily,
       on Mondays relatives come,
       on Tuesdays no one comes to eat,
       on Wednesdays if people receive guests, it is good for them,
       on Thursdays if someone comes as a guest he will become an enemy.
       on Fridays friends one has not seen visit
       on Saturdays it is not good to have guests
       and any day is good to have friends whom you like as guests.
       O lord, with a shining mazu weapon in your beautiful hand,
       god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       69. Puberty—days of the week
       If a girl gets her first menses on—
       Sunday, she will be sick,
       Monday, she will be a chaste women,
       Tuesday, she will sad,
       Wednesday, she will get many smart children,
       Thursday, her children will become rich,
       Friday, she will be rich, beautiful and enjoy her life,
       and Saturday, she will be poor and wander everywhere.
       O shining lord, I am your poor devotee,
       yet you took me with love and gave me your grace.
       O god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       70. Puberty—the zodiac
       Wise people say that
       if a girl gets her first menses under the sign of—
       Aries, she will be poor,
       Taurus, she will become a prostitute,
       Gemini, she will prosperous and happy,
       Cancer, she will be friendly with all,
       Leo, she will have disgrace and poverty,
       Virgo, she will be famous,
       Libra, she will be careful in spending money,
       Scorpio, she will be sick and suffer,
       Sagitarius, she will follow wrong paths in life,
       Capricorn, she will lose her dignity,
       Aquarius, she will be happy in life,
       and Pisces, she will be wise.
       O god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       71. Islands and Oceans
       These are the seven oceans that surround the earth and the islands.
       The measure of Karunkadal that surrounds the earth is one lakh
       yo-janas.
       The Karunkadal surrounds Navalam island,
       the Karuppancattrukkadal surrounds Ilavam island,
       the Madukkadal surrounds Kuca Island,
       the Neykkadal surrounds Grauja island,
       the Thiruppalkadal surrounds Savagam Island,
       the Tayirkkadal surrounds Sanmali Island,
       and the Nannirkkadal surrounds Putkaram Island.
       O god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       72. Precious things
       More than thousands of weapons, horses are jewels for an army,
       a smart minister is a jewel for the king of a country,
       a beautiful chaste woman is a jewel,
       a scholar learned in many arts who is modest is a jewel on the
       earth,
       a rich man with unlimited wealth who is generous is a jewel,
       a person who is born in a good family with true knowledge is a
       jewel.
       O faultless lord, you have the form of the Vedas and Agamas
       that are indestructible.
       O god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       73. Leaves for eating food
       One can eat food on these leaves—
       banana leaves, punnaburasu leaves, good kurukkathi leaves,
       leaves, jackfruit leaves, coconut leaves
       and pannir leaves because they are all good for health.
       One should not eat on a screw pine leaves, arthi leaves,
       aaveraṇḍa leaves, sahadeva leaves, muḷmurukku leaves,
       erukkilai leaves and kichili leaves
       because they are not good for health.
       Eating snacks often, drinking water when one eats,
       eating a lot of rice and eating before one gets hungry
       will spoil one’s health.
       O lord, god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       Madaveḷ our beloved king, the chief of Vellala community
       on the earth surrounded with ocean,
       worships you in his heart every day.
       74. The poverty of poets
       Good poets, the kings of poetry, wander in all the three worlds
       proclaiming all kinds of praise to misers and begging for money,
       yet a stupid person who cannot read or write
       says that he is matchless and smart.
       In an assembly a miser claims that he is like the great patron
       Karnan,
       someone who is ugly pretends that he is Manmadan,
       a coward who cannot even pick up a weapon says he is heroic like
       Ar-junan,
       and a lier claims to be like Harichandra who never lies.
       O lord, you have a dark neck because you have swallowed the poison
       strong as fire,
       You are the god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       and Madaveḷ our beloved king, the chief of Vellala community
       on the earth surrounded with oceans
       worships you every day in his heart.
       75. A poet
       A poet should know good Tamil,
       all the four types of poetry in Tamil
       and recite them like a stream flowing with sweet honey,
       like a rain of faultless nectar.
       He should know the wonderful Tamil poems—
       the epics, akam, puram, alangaram, prabhandam,
       all types of grammar,
       commentaries on all poetry
       and the various kinds of colloquial Tamil.
       A good poet should be able to stand in front of an ocean-like
       assembly
       and give a speech that sounds like the roaring ocean. O faultless
       lord, you, our friend, drank poison
       and your neck is dark.
       Madaveḷ our beloved king, the chief of Vellala community
       on the earth surrounded with oceans,
       worships you every day in his heart.
       76. Karma and the body
       These parts of your body will have good karma if —
       your eyes see virtuous people,
       your ears hear compassionate words from elders,
       your mouth praises good people’s fame and reverences them with
       words,
       your hands worship faultless people,
       and your body does faultless service for good people.
       If someone obeys the orders of good people,
       that is the most fortunate thing that can come for one from former
       births.
       O lord, you give me the knowledge that removes my egotism.
       O god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       77. Birthdays
       If someone is born—
       on Sunday, he will have much trouble in life,
       on Monday, he will have health and wealth
       by the grace of the god,
       on Tuesday, he will not have health,
       on Wednesday, he will learn many good arts
       and become famous and be intelligent,
       on Thursday, he will have good clothes.
       on Friday, he will have good relationships with women,
       and on Saturday, he will suffer.
       O faultless lord, god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       78. Desire
       If someone desires gold, he does not respect his family and guru,
       if he is hungry he will not know the taste of the food,
       if he wanders about fascinated with prostitutes
       and falls in their net,
       he is without fear or shame,
       if he wants to learn he will not worry about comforts and sleep.
       To lead a simple life, praise and disgrace are not important.
       Giving troubles to others takes away a person’s ability to
       understand good and bad.
       Everyone should know that some actions are bad and hell exists.
       O faultless lord, you wear the skin of an elephant.
       You are the god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri
       and our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       79. The monsoon
       During these times rain will fall
       and make crops flourish—
       in the month of Chitrai under the star of Parani,
       in the faultless month of Vaikasi,
       on the fourth day after a full moon,
       on the fourth of the month, Ani, when the moon is waning,
       in the month of Adi on Ekadasi day in the evening
       when the sun sets,
       and in the month of Avani, on Mula star when the sun sets.
       Your chest is adorned with beautiful Kuvalai garlands,
       O god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       and our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       80. Useless things
       These things are useless—
       wealth that does not help when one needs it,
       a relative who does not help when one is in trouble,
       knowledge that does not help when one needs to speak in an
       assembly,
       an army that does not help when enemies come in front of a king,
       worship that does not help Vimalan, the faultless god,
       a light that does not shine when there is darkness,
       food that does not help when one is hungry.
       clothes that do not help for cold weather,
       a wife who does not help when one is sick or tired,
       being coquettish when one does not really in love,
       and a son who does not help his old parents.
       O lord, you are the ancient one
       whom even the gods and the sages could not reach,
       O god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri.
       Our king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       81. Sages
       These are the six duties of all sages—
       following the rules of purity,
       going to rivers and bathe in the morning,
       not forgetting to say the Gayathri prayer three times a day,
       receiving guests happily and serving them
       and performing the prescribed rituals without forgetting any.
       Sages should not be greedy,
       and should follow all orthodox manners.
       If they who do all these things tell the rain to fall, it will.
       The power of the scholars of the Vedas is so great that it cannot
       be de-scribed.
       You are the faultless lord adorned with athi garlands
       and stay on the high mountains,
       you are our chief and you rule me.
       O god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       82. Excellent kings
       Excellent kings follow the rules of Manu,
       all other kings praise their wisdom and heroism,
       they are victorious and fight with their swords,
       they ride well on horses and elephants,
       have smart ministers, strong forts, ocean-like armies,
       chariots, horses, elephants and strong warriors.
       They have an assembly of good scholars
       who know all about other countries,
       and their captains know when to go to war
       are aware of the plans of other kingdoms,
       and are brave, never retreating when they fight.
       The people in their country are wealthy
       and they have ocean-like quantities of food.
       You are the god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri
       and our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       83. Good Merchants
       Merchants—
       cross the oceans to do business,
       go to Kerala in the south of India,
       do not wander about a lot or become distracted,
       do not get discouraged if their business does not go well,
       make farmers who labor to grow crops their friends,
       know where they can make money and where they cannot,
       help others and increase their wealth,
       send their workers long distances for profit
       and find out where goods are the most inexpensive,
       go there and buy many things for a bargain price.
       Though they are careful about the price of the things they buy,
       they do not hesitate to give mountains of money to buy something
       worth-while.
       O lord, god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       84. Farmers
       Farmers—
       wear fresh garlands of kuvalai blossoms,
       plow and grow grain to nourish the life of the people,
       help Brahmins perform worship and sacrifices for everyone’s welfare
       and bless kings to be victorious and rule the country well.
       Merchants receive grain from the farmers and receive gold selling
       it.
       It is because farmers grow paddy and give it to temples
       that worship is performed in temples everywhere
       so that people may live happy without poverty and get food.
       O great lord, you stay in the silver mountains always,
       you are the god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri
       and our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       85. The treasurer, the minister and the captain of the army
       The treasurer of a country should know the wealth of his king
       and of enemy kings and he should know what the future of his
       country will be.
       A smart minister knows the thoughts of his king,
       the time and the place where actions should be done
       and the wisdom and strength of the citizens of his country.
       The captain of an army should know the ability of his warriors and
       of en-emy warriors
       before he goes to fight and he should attain victory in all
       battles.
       O faultless lord, you share half of your body
       with the beautiful daughter of Himalaya, more loving than all the
       mothers of the world,
       and you are everything in the world.
       O god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       86. The royal accountant
       If a letter comes to the palace,
       the following should be as clear to a good accountant as a nelli
       fruit he holds in his hand:
       who sent it, what time it was written,
       what the writer wants to achieve and where it comes from.
       He should be able to read it
       and write an answer for the king, knowing the thoughts of the king.
       He should be able to count, add and subtract in a few seconds.
       He should be able to make a mountain into a mustard seed
       and a mustard seed to a mountain in an account.
       O lord, you are all forms, the formless, light and the sky,
       you are the god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri
       and our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       87. Anger
       Anger is the father and mother of all sins.
       It destroys one’s family,
       does not allow a person to be successful in any action,
       gives sorrow,
       destroys excellence,
       kills relationships,
       brings blame,
       makes others into enemies,
       removes compassion,
       and is a mean thing.
       It brings loneliness and destroys the ability to be friends with
       others,
       it takes a person to Yama and pushes him into a hole of fire.
       O lord, you take away all my troubles and protect me.
       O god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       88. Receiving things from others
       If one praises his own penance and generosity
       he will not obtain what he wants.
       The foolish people who disgrace Brahmins will lose the days of
       their life.
       Even if someone gives fragrant garlands, sandal paste,
       yogurt, milk, meat, a house and good paddy,
       those who know the rules of Manu will not accept them without
       paying for it.
       If people, even those born into low status,
       give honey, fruit, roots, firewood and banana leaves
       and serve food with love to good people, they will accept them.
       O beloved lord, you carry bull flag,
       you are the beloved of Uma, the goddess,
       you are our friend and chief.
       O god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       89. The Tattvas
       The tattvas are thirty-six,
       the atma tattvas that are connected to body are twenty-four,
       the five bhutas are earth, water, fire, wind and sky,
       the five feelings are taste, see, hear, smell and touch,
       the five parts of body that feel are mouth, eyes, ears, nose
       and body,
       the five acting body parts are feet, hands, mouth, anus
       and the genitals,
       the four karanas are mind, knowledge, thought and egoism.
       The seven faultless vidya tattvas are
       time, art, fate, skill, rāga, purusha and illusion.
       The five Shiva tattvas are sūktavidya, Īśa, sadaikyam, sakti
       and Shivam.
       O lord, you gave your grace to the sages Janaka and others
       under the shadow of the ancient banyan tree
       and you are our friend and chief.
       O god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       90. Kama’s arrows
       Kama’s five flower arrows are the lotus, ashoka, jasmine, neelam
       and mango flower,
       The flower of the lotus brings desire into someone’s mind,
       the mango flower makes a woman’s body pale,
       the ashoka causes lovesickness,
       the cool jasmine makes someone sleepy
       and the neelam brings deep distress.
       All these make someone think only of the love they feel.
       They have no other desires, sigh, talk incoherently,
       feel their hearts tremble, their minds are shocked,
       they do not want to eat, feel feverish, become weak and thin,
       and do not want to speak.
       They suffer so much that others cannot tell if they are alive or
       not.
       O lord, our chief, god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       91. Kama’s weapons
       Kama’s arrows are the lotus, ashoka, jasmine, neelam
       and a mango tree blossom.
       His bow is fresh, sweet sugarcane,
       his arrows are swarms of dark bees,
       his chariot is the breeze,
       his horses are green parrots,
       his elephant is darkness,
       the thazai flower is his sword,
       the roaring ocean is his drum,
       a fish is his banner,
       and a battlefield is his mind.
       His army is filled with beautiful girls,
       a cuckoo bird is his trumpet,
       his songs are the buzzing of bees
       and his parasol is the moon.
       His beloved wife is Rathi,
       his crown is the young breasts of fearless young women,
       the place where he always resides is the mons of women.
       O lord, you are nectar for poor people,
       the god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       and our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       92. Make these as your friends.
       There are fifteen people who know the good paths of life
       that one should not make into enemies even in dreams—
       kings, ministers, evil people, gossipers,
       those who get angry all the time with their messengers,
       strong people, accountants, good cooks who cook and serve food,
       magicians, rich people, low-caste people, advisers, good medicine
       men,
       and poets who compose good poems.
       O lord, you have your wife as half of your body.
       You, a friend, are praised by the Vedas,
       a treasure for your devotees and our chief.
       Brahma who rides on a swan
       and Vishnu could not find your head or feet
       when they searched for you.
       O lord, god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       93. Choosing the good
       The following things should be checked to be sure they are good
       before being used—
       sweet sugarcane, white milk, cotton, paddy, sesame seeds,
       and coconut.
       One should select servants only after knowing their faults
       and being sure that they will not make mistakes in their work.
       One should praise beautiful flowers, girls as pretty as paintings,
       those who help others, children, warriors and elders with good
       hearts.
       O lord, I have done many mistakes yet you still gave me your grace.
       O god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       94. The Goddess Uma of Kanchi
       Uma gave houses for pregnant women to help them with giving birth,
       she gave earrings to others, gave milk for children.
       built good choultries that give food to poor,
       built ashrams for the poor to stay,
       built stone platforms so cows could scratch their backs,
       helped poor women and brought them joy,
       helped barbers and washer people,
       gave mirrors so people could see their faces,
       gave water to the thirsty, gave oil for people’s hair,
       gave food for cows, helped the sick,
       gave snacks and betel leaves to the people,
       took food for prisoners, helped the suffering,
       cultivated gardens, conducted marriages according to the shastras,
       gave food to beggars, sages and animals,
       built temples, gave medicines to the sick
       and provided food to students.
       O lord, you are the beloved of the goddess, the mother of all,
       the god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri
       and our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       95. A good home
       A good home is a house where a husband and wife do their duties
       well
       and take care of their father and mother.
       It has a good wife, good relatives, obedient children and servants,
       people who come to them for help.
       In it, the duties for ancestors and gurus are performed,
       the poor are helped and faultless guests are received.
       Its husband wife are kind to their siblings, cows and Brahmins,
       and they live doing their duties so not even the sages are their
       equal.
       O dear lord, the beloved of the goddess Parvathi, the mother of all
       life,
       god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       96. Puranas
       Ten wonderful puranas tell good religious stories of Shiva—
       The Bhautikam, Lingam, Markaṇḍeyam, the beautiful Vamanam, Matsyam,
       Saivam, Perungkurmam, Varaaham, Kandacaritham, and Bramaanḍam.
       The Vaishnavam, Garuḍam, Naradam, and Bhagavatam tell religious
       sto-ries of Vishnu.
       The Padmapuranam and Brahmakaivarthapuranam tell religious stories
       about Brahma.
       The Suriyapuranam tells stories about Suriya, the sun.
       The Agneeyam tells the story of Agni, the fire god.
       O lord, the river Ganges flows in your hair
       and your head is adorned with the white moon and arugu grass.
       You are the god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri
       and our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       97. Nonexistent things
       These are the things that are rare—
       untasted nectar, an unworn ornament, undiminishing wealth,
       a lotus flower that does not bloom when it sees the sun,
       an alli flower that does not bloom when the moon rises,
       a cloud that gives rain without becoming dark,
       a moon without its dark spots
       and a lion that does not live in a forest.
       The great speak good words, and are famous, educated,
       generous, heroic, pleasant and good hearted.
       O lord, god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madavel, generous as the karpaga tree
       and praised by all the world,
       worships you in his heart every day.
       98. Vishnu’s avatharams
       As a fish Vishnu went in the ocean,
       killed Somuhasuran, brought the Vedas for the gods
       and saved them from the Asuras,
       as a turtle he gave nectar to the gods,
       as a boar he killed Hiraniyasuran when he took the earth rolling it
       as a mat,
       as a man-lion he killed Hiranyakashipu,
       as Vamana he measured the world and the sky,
       as Parasurama with an axe he destroyed
       many dynasties of the earth,
       as Rama he fought with the proud king Ravana
       and as Balarama and Krishna
       he took away the fear of the people on the earth.
       He will come in the form of Kalki in future.
       These are the ten incarnation of Vishnu,
       O lord, god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri.
       Our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       99. Lord Shiva
       Lord Shiva, the beloved of the goddess Uma,
       his head adorned with the moon,
       rides on a bull, dances beautifully in Thillai
       and shares half of his body with Uma.
       He took the form of a bridegroom, and of a beggar,
       he burned Kama, conquered Yama for Markandeya,
       burned the three forts of his enemies,
       and killed the heroic Salandaran.
       He is Veerabadran and he conquered Narasimhan,
       pinched off one of the heads of Brahma,
       took the form of a hunter, wears a garland of horns,
       gave his grace to the strong Sandeswara,
       drank the poison that came out of the milky ocean,
       and gave the discus to Vishnu.
       He is Soman and created his son Skanda,
       gave the mango to his son Ganesa
       and has the form of Dakshinamurthy and the Linga.
       He raises one foot and dances and his form is joy.
       O lord, god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri,
       our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       100. Ambalavanar’s request to Shiva
       O lord, people adorn you with blossoming fresh kuvalai,
       soft mullai, jasmine, marukkozundu, lovely vilvam
       with all other flowers and fragrant leaves and you accept them.
       God of gods, people decorate you with the erukku flower,
       the puḷai flower, arugu grass and red mulli flower garlands
       and you happily accept them all.
       It is your duty to accept my poor poems
       just as you accept the good poems of wonderful poets.
       O faultless lord, your head where the Ganges rolls with its waves
       is adorned with a snake and the lovely crescent moon.
       You are the god Aṛappuḷeesurar of Saduragiri
       and our dear king Madaveḷ worships you in his heart every day.
       SUBHAM
       --------------- ampalavāṇak kavirāyaravarkaḷ
       pāṭiya "caturakiri aṟappaḷīcura catakam"
       kāppu
       nēricai veṇpā
       umparkōṉ emperumāṉ ōṅkaṟappa ḷīcuraṉmēṟ
       paimporuḷcē ruñcatakam pāṭavē - ampuviyōr
       ākkum tutikkaiyāṉ aṉpuṭaiyārk kiṉparuḷik
       kākkum tutikkaiyāṉ kāppu.
       1. uyar piṟappu
       kaṭalulakil vāḻumuyir eḻupiṟap piṉuḷmikka
             kāṭcipeṟu naracaṉ mamāyk
       karutap piṟattalari tatiṉumuyar cātiyiṟ
             kaṟpuvaḻi varutal aritu;
       vaṭivamuṭaṉ avayavam kuṟaiyātu piḻaiyātu
             varutalatu taṉiṉum aritu;
       vantālum itu puṇyam itupāvam eṉṟeṇṇi
             mācilvaḻi niṟṟal aritu;
       neṭiyataṉa vāṉātal aritatiṉ irakkamuḷa
             neñciṉōṉ ātal aritu;
       nēcamuṭaṉ uṉpatat taṉpaṉāy varutalin
             nīḷnilat tatiṉum aritām;
       aṭiyavark kamutamē! mōḻaipū patipeṟṟa
             atipaṉema tarumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       ------------
             2. illāḷiṉ ciṟappu
       kaṇavaṉuk kiṉiyaḷāy, mrutupāṣi yāy, mikka
             kamalainikar rūpa vatiyāyk,
       kāyciṉam ilāḷumāy, nōypaḻi yilātatōr
             kālvaḻiyil vanta vaḷumāy,
       maṇamikka nāṇammaṭam accam payirppeṉṉa
             varumiṉiya mārkka vatiyāy,
       māmimā maṟkitam ceypavaḷu māy, vācal
             varuvirun tōmpu pavaḷāy,
       iṇaiyilmakiḻ naṉcolvaḻi niṟpavaḷu māyvanti
             eṉpeyar ilāta vaḷumāy,
       iratiyeṉa vēlīlai puripavaḷu māyppiṟartam
             ilvaḻi celāta vaḷumāy,
       aṇiyiḻai yoruttiyuṇ ṭāyiṉavaḷ kaṟpuṭaiyaḷ
             ākum;ema tarumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       ------------
       3. naṉmakkaṭ pēṟu
       taṅkulam viḷaṅkiṭap periyōrkaḷ ceytuvaru
             tarumaṅkaḷ ceytu varalum,
       taṉmamiku tāṉaṅkaḷ ceytalum, kaṉayōka
             cātakaṉ eṉappaṭutalum,
       maṅkutal ilātataṉ tantaitāy kurumoḻi
             maṟātuvaḻi pāṭu ceyalum,
       vaḻivaḻi varumtamatu tēvatā pattipuri
             mārkkamum, tīrkkā yuḷum,
       iṅkita kuṇaṅkaḷum, vittaiyum, puttiyum,
             īkaiyum, caṉmārk kamum
       ivaiyelām uṭaiyavaṉ putalvaṉām; avaṉaiyē
             īṉṟavaṉ puṇya vāṉām;
       aṅkaca virōtiyē! cōtiyē! nīticēr
             aracaṉema tarumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       ---------------
       4. uṭaṉ piṟappu
       kūṭap piṟantavark keytutuyar tamatutuyar
             koḷcukam tamcu kameṉak
       koṇṭutām tēṭuporuḷ avartēṭu poruḷ
             avarkoḷ kōtilpukaḻ tampu kaḻeṉat,
       tēṭuṟṟa avarnintai tamnintai tamtavam
             tītilavar tavamām eṉac
       cīvaṉ oṉṟuṭalvē ṟivarkkeṉṉa, aintalaic
             cīṟaravam maṇivāy toṟum
       kūṭuṟṟa iraiyeṭut tōruṭal niṟaittiṭum
             koḷkaipōl piriviṉ ṟiyē
       kūṭivāḻ pavartammai yēcakō tarareṉak
             kūṟuvatu vēta rumamām;
       āṭic civantacen tāmaraip pātaṉē!
             aṇṇalema tarumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       -----------
       5. nallāciriyar iyal
       vētānta cittānta vaḻiterin tācāra
             vivaraviñ ñāṉapūrṇa
       vityāvi cēṭacaṟ kuṇa catya campaṉṉa
             vīravai rākya mukya
       cātāra ṇappiriya yōkamārk kātikya
             camātiniṣ ṭāṉu pavarāyc,
       caṭcamaya nilaimaiyum paramantra paratantra
             tarumamum paraca mayamum
       nītiyiṉ uṇarntu, tattuvamārkka rāyp, pirama
             nilaikaṇṭu pāca milarāy,
       nittiyā ṉantacai taṉyarāy, ācaiyaṟu
             neṟiyuḷōr caṟku ravarām
       ātāra māyuyirk kuyirāki yevaiyumām
             amala! ematarumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       ---------
             6. naṉmāṇākkariyal
       vaitālum ōrkoṭumai ceytālu mōcīṟi
             māṟātikaḻn tālumō
       maṉatucaṟ ṟākilum kōṇātu, nāṇātu,
             mātāpi tāveṉakkup
       poyyāmal nī yeṉṟu kaṉivoṭum paṇiviṭai
             purintu, poru ḷuṭalāviyum
       puṉita! uṉṟaṉa teṉat tattañcey tiravupakal
             pōṟṟi, mala raṭiyil vīḻntu,
       meyyāka vēparavi upatēca matupeṟa
             virumpuvōr caṟcī ṭarām
       viṉaivēr aṟumpaṭi avarkkaruḷcey tiṭuvatē
             mikkatē cikaratukaṭaṉ
       aiyā! purampoṭi paṭacceyta cemmalē!
             aṇṇalema tarumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       -----------
       7. poruḷceyal vakai
       puṇṇiya vacattiṉāṟ celvamatu varavēṇṭum;
             poruḷairaṭ cikka vēṇṭum
       puttiyuṭaṉ atuvoṉṟu nūṟāka vēceytu
             pōtavum vaḷarkka vēṇṭum;
       uṇṇavēṇ ṭum; piṉpu nallavat rāparaṇam
             uṭalilta rikka vēṇṭum;
       uṟṟaperi yōrkaviñar tamarā tularkkutavi
             ōṅkupukaḻ tēṭa vēṇṭum;
       maṇṇilveku tarumaṅkaḷ ceyavēṇṭum; uyarmōṭca
             vaḻitēṭa vēṇṭum; aṉṟi,
       vaṟitiṟ putaittuvait tīyāta pērkaḷē
             mārkkamaṟi yākkuru ṭarām
       aṇṇalē! kaṅkā kulattalaivaṉ mōḻaitarum
             aḻakaṉema tarumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       ---------
             8. oṇṇātu
       vañcakar tamaikkūṭi maruvoṇā taṉpilār
             vācaliṟ cello ṇātu;
       vāteva riṭattilum puriyoṇā taṟivilā
             maṭaiyarmuṉ niṟ koṇātu;
       koñcamē ṉumtītu ceyyoṇā toruvarmēl
             kuṟṟañco loṇṇā tayal
       kōtaiyarka ḷōṭupari kācañce yoṇṇātu;
             kōḷuraikaḷ pēcoṇātu;
       nañcutarum aravoṭum paḻakoṇā tiruḷvaḻi
             naṭantutaṉi yēkoṇātu
       natiperuk kākiṉ atil nīñcalcey yoṇṇātu;
             nalvaḻi maṟakkoṇātu;
       añcāmal aracarmuṉ pēcoṇā tivaiyelām
             aṟiyumema tarumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       ---------
       9. oṉṟaṟkoṉṟu aḻaku
       vāḻmaṉai taṉakkaḻaku kulamaṅkai; kulamaṅkai
             vāḻviṉuk kaḻaku ciṟuvar;
       vaḷarciṟuva rukkaḻaku kalvi;kal vikkaḻaku
             mānilam tuticey kuṇamām;
       cūḻkuṇa mataṟkaḻaku pēraṟivu; pēraṟivu
             tōṉṟiṭil ataṟka ḻakutāṉ
       tūyatavam, mēṉmai, upakāram, viratam, poṟumai
             collariya periyōr kaḷait
       tāḻtal, paṇi viṭaipurital, cīlam, nēcam, karuṇai
             cāṟṟumivai aḻakeṉ parkāṇ
       cauri, mala rōṉ, amarar, muṉivar, muccuṭarelām
             caraṇamemai raṭci yeṉavē.
       āḻkaṭal utittuvaru viṭamuṇṭa kaṇṭaṉē!
             aṇṇalema tarumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       -------------
       10. oṉṟu illāmaṟ payaṉpaṭātavai
       kōvil il lātavūr, nāciyil lāmukam,
             koḻunaṉ il lāta maṭavār,
       kuṇamatil lāvittai, maṇamatil lātamalar,
             kuñcaram ilāta cēṉai,
       kāvalil lātapayir, pālaril lātamaṉai,
             katirmati yilāta vāṉam,
       kaviñaril lātacapai, cutilayai ilātapaṇ,
             kāvalar ilāta tēcam,
       īvatil lātataṉam niyamamil lātacepam,
             icai lavaṇam illā tavūṇ,
       iccaiyil lātapeṇ pōkanalam, ivai tammiṉ
             ētupalaṉ uṇṭu? kaṇṭāy!
       āviyaṉai yāṭkiṭam tantavā! kaṟpataru
             ākumema tarumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       -------------
       11. takāta cērkkai
       pūtatayai illāta lōpiya riṭattilē
             poruḷaiaru ḷiccey taṉai!
       puṇṇiyam ceykiṉṟa caṟcaṉa riṭattilē
             pollāta miṭivait taṉai!
       nītiyakal mūṭark karuntati yeṉattakka
             neṟimāta raittan taṉṉai!
       nitāṉamuḷa uttamark kiṅkitam ilātakoṭu
             nīliyaic cōvit taṉai!
       cātiyil uyarntapēr īṉarpiṉ ṉēceṉṟu
             tāḻntupara vaccey taṉai!
       tamiḻarumai yaṟiyāta pullarmēṟ kavivāṇar
             tāmpāṭa vēcey taṉai!
       ātaravilāmalip paṭiceytateṉ colāy?
             amala! ematarumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       -----------
             12. patar
       māṟāta kalaikaṟṟum nilaipeṟṟa capaiyilē
             vāyilā tavaṉoru patar;
       vāḷpiṭit tetirivariṉ ōṭip patuṅkiṭum
             maṉakkōḻai tāṉoru patar;
       ēṟā vaḻakkurait taṉaivaruñ cīciyeṉ
             ṟikaḻaniṟ pāṉoru patar;
       illāḷ puṟañcelac cammatittavaḷō
             ṭiṇaṅkivāḻ pavaṉoru patar;
       vēṟoruvar meccātu taṉṉaiyē tāṉmecci
             vīṇpēcu vāṉoru patar;
       vēcaiyarka ḷācaikoṇ ṭuḷḷaḷavum maṉaiyāḷai
             viṭṭuviṭu vāṉoru patar;
       āṟāta tuyaraiyum miṭiyaiyum tīrttaruḷcey
             amala! ematarumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       ------------
             13. ceyya vēṇṭum
       vālipan taṉilvittai kaṟka vēṇṭum;kaṟṟa
             vaḻiyilē niṟka vēṇṭum;
       vaḷaikaṭal tirintu poruḷ tēṭavēṇṭum;tēṭi
             vaḷaraṟañ ceyya vēṇṭum;
       cīlamuṭai yōrkaḷaic cēravēṇ ṭum;pirital
             ceyyā tirukka vēṇṭum
       centamiḻp pāṭalpala koḷḷavēṇ ṭum;koṇṭu
             tiyākam koṭukka vēṇṭum;
       ñālamicai palatarumam nāṭṭavēṇ ṭum;nāṭṭi
             naṉṟāy naṭatta vēṇṭum;
       nampaṉ iṇai yaṭipūcai paṇṇavēṇ ṭum;paṇṇi
             ṉālummiku patti vēṇṭum
       ālamamar kaṇṭaṉē! pūtiyaṇi muṇṭaṉē!
             aṉaka! ematarumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       -----------
       14. mēṉmēl uyarcci
       taṉmaṭṭil iravātu cīvaṉam ceypavaṉ
             cāmarttiyam uḷapuruṭaṉ ām
       cantatam patiṉmaraik kāppāṟṟu vōṉmikka
             taraṇipukaḻ tarutēvaṉ ām.
       poṉmaṭṭi lāmalīn torunūṟu pēraip
             purappavaṉ poruvi lintraṉ,
       puvimītil āyiram pērtamaik kāppāṟṟu
             puṇyavā ṉēpiramaṉ ām
       naṉmaitaru patiṉā yirampēr tamaikkāttu
             raṭcippa vaṉceṅ kaṇmāl,
       nāḷumivaṉ mēlatikam ākuveku pērkkutavu
             naraṉē makātē vaṉ ām,
       aṉmaṭṭu vārkuḻali pākaṉē! ēkaṉē!
             aṇṇalema tarumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatil niṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       -----------
             15. ceyaṟkaruñ ceyal
       nīrmēl naṭakkalām! eṭṭiyum tiṉṉalām!
             neruppainīr pōṟcey yalām!
       neṭiyaperu vēṅkaiyaik kaṭṭiyē taḻuvalām!
             nīḷara viṉaippū ṇalām!
       pārmītu maṇalaic camaikkalām cōṟeṉap
             paṭcamuṭa ṉēuṇṇa lām!
       pāṇamoṭu kuṇṭuvila kacceyya lām! marap
             pāvaipē cappaṇ ṇalām!
       ērmēvu kāṭiyum kaṭaiyuṟṟu veṇṇeyum
             eṭukkalām! putti caṟṟum
       illāta mūṭartam maṉattait tiruppavē
             evarukkum muṭiyā tukāṇ!
       ārmēvu koṉṟaipuṉai vēṇiyā! curarparavum
             amalaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       ----------
             16. nallōr - 1
       ceynnaṉṟi maṟavāta pērkaḷum, oruvarcey
             tīmaiyai maṟanta pērum,
       tiraviyam taravariṉum oruvarmaṉai yāṭṭimēṟ
             cittamvai yāta pērum,
       kaikaṇ ṭeṭuttaporuḷ koṇṭupōyp poruḷāḷar
             kaiyiṟko ṭutta pērum,
       kāciṉiyil oruvarcey tarumamke ṭātapaṭi
             kāttaruḷcey kiṉṟa pērum,
       poyyoṉṟu nitikōṭi variṉum vaḻakkaḻivu
             pukalāta nilaikoḷ pērum.
       puvimītu talaipōkum eṉṉiṉum kaṉavilum
             poymmaiyurai yāta pērum,
       aiyaiṅ kivarelām caṟpuruṭa reṉṟulakar
             akamakiḻvar! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       ---------
             17. nallōr - 2
       aṭaikkalam eṉattēṭi varuvōr tamaikkākkum
             avaṉē makāpuru ṭaṉām;
       añcāmal etuvariṉum etupō kiṉumcittam
             acaivilaṉ makātī raṉām;
       toṭuttoṉṟu coṉṉacol tappātu ceykiṉṟa
             tōṉṟalē makarā caṉām;
       tūṟik kalaikkiṉṟa pērvārttai kēḷāta
             turaiyē makāmē ruvām!
       aṭukkiṉṟa pērkkuvarum iṭartīrt tiraṭcikkum
             avaṉē makātiyā kiyām;
       avaravar tarātaram aṟintumari yātaiceyum
             avaṉē makāuci taṉām;
       aṭarkkiṉṟa muttalaic cūlaṉē! lōlaṉē!
             amalaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       -----------
             18. illai
       kāmikku muṟaiyillai; vēcaikku nāṇillai;
             kayavarkku mēṉmai yillai;
       kaṉṉamiṭu kaḷvaruk kiruḷillai; vipacāra
             kaṉṉiyark kāṇai yillai;
       tāmeṉum mayakkaṟut tōṅkuperi yōrkkuvaru
             cātikulameṉpa tillai;
       tāṭcaṇiyam uṭaiyapērk kikalillai; eṅkumoru
             cārpilārk kiṭama tillai;
       pūmikkuḷ īyāta lōparkku vaḷamāṉa
             pukaḻeṉpa toṉṟu millai;
       pulaiyarkku nicamillai; kaipporuḷ ilātatōr
             puruṭaruk koṉṟum illai;
       yāmiṉi taṉakku nikar kantarat tiṟaivaṉē
             aṉpuṭaiya arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       -----------
             19. nilaiyāmai
       kāyamoru puṟputam! vāḻvumalai cūḻtarum
             kāṭṭilāṟ ṟiṉpe rukkām!
       karuṇaitaru putalvarkiḷai maṉaimaṉaiviivaiyelām
             kāṉalkāṭ ṭumpra vākam!
       mēyapuya palavalimai iḷamaiyaḻa kivaiyelām
             veyilmañcaḷ! uyirtā ṉumē,
       veṭṭaveḷi taṉilvaitta tīpameṉa vēkaruti,
             vīṇpoḻutu pōkkāmalē
       nēyamuṭa ṉēteḷin taṉpoṭuṉ pātattil
             niṉaivuvait tirupō tiṉum
       nīrkoṇṭu malarkoṇṭu parivukoṇ ṭarccikka
             nimalaṉē! aruḷpuri kuvāy
       āyum aṟi vāḷarpaṇi pātaṉē! pōtaṉē!
             aṇṇalema tarumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       -----------
             20. tirumakaḷ iruppiṭam
       naṟpari mukattilē, maṉṉavar iṭattilē,
             nākarikar māmaṉai yilē,
       naḷiṉamalar taṉṉilē, kūviḷan taruvilē,
             naṟaikoṇṭa paintuḷa vilē,
       kaṟpuṭaiyar vaṭivilē, kaṭalilē, koṭiyilē,
             kalyāṇa vāyil taṉilē,
       kaṭinaka riṭattilē, naṟ cennel viḷaivilē,
             katipeṟu viḷakka taṉilē,
       poṟpuṭaiya caṅkilē, mikkōrkaḷ vākkilē
             poyyāta pērpā lilē,
       pūntaṭan taṉṉilē, pāṟkuṭat tiṭaiyilē
             pōtakat tiṉcira cilē
       aṟperuṅ kōtaimalar maṅkaivāḻ iṭameṉpar
             aṇṇalema tarumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       ----------
             21. mūtēvi iruppiṭam
       mitamiṉṟi aṉṉam pucippōr iṭattilum,
             mikupāṭai yō riṭattum,
       meyyoṉ ṟilāmalē poypēci yētiriyum
             mikkapā takariṭattum,
       katiyoṉṟum ilarpōla maliṉamko ḷumpaḻaiya
             kantaiyaṇi vōri ṭattum
       kaṭinā yeṉaccīṟi evaraiyum cērkkāta
             kaṉṉivāḻ maṉaiya kattum,
       taticēr kaṭattilum, karttapat tiṭaiyilum,
             cārntaāṭ ṭiṉti raḷilum
       cāmpiṇa mukattilum ivaiyelām kavalaipuri
             tavvaivāḻ iṭameṉpar kāṇ!
       atirūpa malaimaṅkai nēcaṉē! mōḻaitarum
             aḻakaṉema tarumaimatavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       -----------
             22. irunilaiyiṉum payaṉaṟṟavai
       kuṇamaṟṟa pēymuruṅ kaittaḻai taḻaitteṉṉa?
             kuṭṭanōy koṇṭu meṉṉa?
       kuraikkiṉṟa nāymaṭi curanteṉṉa ? curavātu
             koñcamāyp pōkil eṉṉa?
       maṇamaṟṟa cemmuruk katupūt talarnteṉṉa?
             malarātu pōkil eṉṉa?
       maturamil lāuvark kaṭalnīr kaṟutteṉṉa?
             māveṇmai yākil eṉṉa?
       uṇavaṟṟa pēyccurai paṭarnteṉṉa? paṭarā
             tularntutāṉ pōki leṉṉa?
       utavāta pērkkuveku vāḻvuvan tāleṉṉa?
             ōṅkummiṭi varileṉ ṉakāṇ?
       aṇiyuṟṟa paiṅkoṉṟai mālikā paraṇaṉē!
             ātiyē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       -----------
       23. kuṟaintālum payaṉpaṭal
       taṟipaṭṭa cantaṉak kaṭṭaipaḻu tāyiṉum
             cārmaṇam paḻutā kumō!
       takkapāl cuvaṟiṭak kāycciṉum atukoṇṭu
             cāramatu raṅku ṟaiyumō?
       niṟaipaṭṭa katirmaṇi aḻukkaṭain tālum atiṉ
             nīḷkuṇam maḻuṅki viṭumō?
       neruppiṭai urukkiṉum aṭukkiṉum taṅkattiṉ
             niṟaiyumāṟ ṟukku ṟaiyumō?
       kaṟaipaṭṭa paimpuyal maṟaittālum atukoṇṭu
             katirmati kaṉampō kumō?
       kaṟṟaperi yōrmakimai aṟpar aṟikilarēṉum
             kāciṉi taṉiṟpō kumō?
       aṟivuṟṟa pēraiviṭ ṭakalāta mūrttiyē!
             aiyaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       -------------
       24. oṉṟukkoṉṟu ātaravu
       vāṉavar pitirkkaḷmuc cuṭarmūvar kōḷkaṭkum
             vāḻvutarum utavi puvaṉam
       vaḷammikka puvaṉam taṉakkumēṉ mēlutavi
             vāḻpeṟ ṟiṭumaṉ ṉarām!
       tēṉamar naṟuntoṭaiyal puṉaimaṉṉa varkkutavi
             cērntakuṭi paṭaivark kamām;
       cērkuṭi paṭaikkutavi viḷaipayir! payirkkutavi
             cīrpeṟa vaḻakku maḻaiyām!
       mēṉimir maḻaikkutavi maṭamātar kaṟpoṉṟu;
             vēntartam nīti yoṉṟu
       vētiyar oḻukkamoṉ ṟimmūṉṟu mēyeṉṟu
             mikkaperi yōrurai ceyvār
       āṉamar neṭuṅkoṭi uyarttaṉam iṟaivaṉē!
             atipaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       ----------
       25. itaṉai itukaṇṭu makiḻum
       tantaitāy malarmukam kaṇṭuniṉ ṟālippa
             tavartanta cantati yatām!
       cantrō tayamkaṇṭu pūrippa tuyarvāvi
             taṅkupaiṅ kumuta malarām!
       puntimakiḻ vāyiravi varutalkaṇ ṭakamakiḻva
             poṅkutā maraimalar kaḷām!
       pōtavum puyalkaṇṭu kaṇkaḷit tēnaṭam
             purivatu mayūra iṉamām!
       cintaimakiḻ vāyutavu tātāvi ṉaikkaṇṭu
             cīrpeṟuva tiravalar kuḻām
       tikaḻnīti maṉṉaraik kaṇṭukaḷi kūrvatic
             cekamelām eṉpar kaṇṭāy!
       antiyam vāṉ aṉaiya ceñcaṭā ṭaviyaṉē!
             amalaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       ----------
             26. ākātavai
       uḷḷaṉ pilātavar tittikka vēpēci
             uṟavāṭum uṟavum uṟavō?
       upacarit taṉpuṭaṉ parimā ṟiṭātacō
             ṟuṇṭavark kaṉṉam āmō?
       taḷḷā tiruntukoṇ ṭoruvarpōyp pārttuvaru
             takkapayir payirā kumō?
       taḷakarttaṉ oruvaṉil lāmalmuṉ ceṉṟiṭum
             tāṉaiyum tāṉai yāmō?
       viḷḷāta pōkamil lātapeṇ mēlvaru
             viruppamum viruppa māmō?
       vekukaṭaṉ paṭṭapēr ceykiṉṟa cīvaṉamum
             mikkacī vaṉamā kumō?
       aḷḷā tiruṅkaruṇai yāḷaṉē! tēvartoḻum
             ātiyē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       -----------
       27. naṟpaṇpukku iṭamilār
       veṟikoṇṭa maṟkaṭam pēykoṇṭu, kaḷḷuṇṭu
             veṅkāñ coṟippu talilē
       vīḻntu, tēḷkoṭṭi ṭaccaṉmārkkam eḷḷaḷavum
             mēvumō? mēvā tupōl,
       kuṟaikiṉṟa puttiyāy, atil aṟpa cātiyāyk,
             kūṭavē iḷamai uṇṭāyk,
       koñcamām atikāra mumkiṭait tālmikka
             kuvalayan taṉila varkku,
       niṟaikiṉṟa pattiyum cīlamum mēṉmaiyum
             nitāṉamum periyōr kaḷmēl
       nēcamum īkaiyum ivaiyelām kaṉavilum
             niṉaivilum varātu kaṇṭāy;
       aṟaikiṉṟa curutiyiṉ poruḷāṉa vaḷḷalē!
             aṇṇalē ! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       ---------
             28. ivar iṉṉa muṟaiyar
       taṉṉāl muṭikkavoṇ ṇātakā riyamvantu
             tāṉmuṭip pōṉta maiyaṉām;
       taṉtalaik kiṭarvanta pōtumīṭṭu tavuvōṉ
             tāytantai yeṉṉal ākum;
       oṉṉār ceyumkoṭumai yālmelivu vantapō
             tutavuvōṉ iṭṭa teyvam;
       uttiput tikaḷcolli mēlvarum kāriyam
             uraippavaṉ kurueṉ ṉalām;
       ennāḷum varumnaṉmai tīmaitaṉa teṉṉavē
             eṇṇivaru vōṉpan tuām;
       irutayam aṟintutaṉ coṟpaṭi naṭakkumavaṉ
             evaṉ eṉiṉum avaṉē cutaṉ
       annāra mumpaṇiyum ennāḷu mēpuṉaiyum
             aṇṇalē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       --------
             29. oḻukum muṟai
       mātā pitāviṉuk kuḷḷaṉ puṭaṉkaṉivu
             māṟāta nallo ḻukkam;
       maruvukuru āṉavark kiṉiyaupa cāramuḷa
             vārttaivaḻi pāṭa ṭakkam;
       kātār karuṅkaṇmaṉai yāḷtaṉak kōcayaṉa
             kālattil nayapā ṭaṇam;
       kaṟṟaperi yōrmutiyar varumā tularkkelām
             karuṇaicēr aruḷvi tāṉam;
       nītipeṟum maṉṉava riṭattatika payaviṉayam;
             neṟiyuṭaiya pērkkiṅkitam;
       nēyamuḷa tamartamak kakamakiḻ vuṭaṉparivu
             nēralar iṭattil vairam
       ātimaṉu nūlcolum vaḻakkamitu ākumema
             taiyaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       ------------
       30. kuṇattaiviṭṭuk kuṟṟattai ēṟṟal
       tuṭṭavika ṭakkaviyai yārumē meccuvar;
             collumnaṟ kaviyai meccār
       turccaṉarkka kammakiḻntu pacarip pārvarum
             tūyarait taḷḷiviṭuvār
       iṭṭamuḷa teyvan taṉaikkaruti ṭār; kaṟup
             peṉṉilō pōyppaṇikuvār;
       īṉṟatāy tantaiyaic caṟṟummati yār; vēcai
             eṉṉilō kālil vīḻvār;
       naṭṭalā paṅkaḷuk kuḷḷāṉa pantuvariṉ
             naṉṟāka vēpē ciṭār;
       nāḷumop pāriyāy vantaput tuṟavukku
             naṉmaipala vēcey kuvār;
       aṭṭaticai cūḻpuviyil ōṅkukali makimaikāṇ!
             attaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       ------------
       31. kuṇaṅkāṇum kuṟi
       kaṟṟōrkaḷ eṉpataic cīlamuṭa ṉēcolum
             kaṉavākki ṉāṟkā ṇalām;
       kaṟpuḷār eṉpataip pārkkiṉṟa pārvaiyoṭu
             kālnaṭaiyi ṉumkā ṇalām;
       aṟṟōrkaḷ eṉpatai oṉṟiṉum vārā
             aṭakkatti ṉāla ṟiyalām;
       aṟamuḷōr eṉpataip pūtatayai yeṉṉumnilai
             yatukaṇṭu tāṉ aṟiyalām;
       vittōṅku payiraik kiḷaittuvaru tuṭiyiṉāl
             viḷaiyumeṉ ṟēa ṟiyalām;
       vīramuṭai yōreṉpa tōṅkivaru tairiya
             vicēṭatti ṉāla ṟiyalām;
       attā! kuṇattiṉāṟ kulanalam teriyalām
             aṇṇalē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       -----------
       32. kūṭiṟ payaṉpaṭal
       cettaipala kūṭiyoru kayiṟāyiṉ atukoṇṭu
             tiṇkariyai yumkaṭ ṭalām!
       tikaḻntapala tuḷikūṭi āṟāyiṉ vāviyoṭu
             tiraḷēṟi niṟaivik kalām!
       ottanuṇ pañcupala cērntunūl āyiṭiṉ
             uṭuttiṭum kalaiāk kalām!
       ōṅkivaru kōluṭaṉ cīlaiyum kūṭiṉāl
             uyarkavikai yākkoḷ ḷalām!
       maṟṟumuyar taṇṭulat tōṭutavi ṭumikūṭiṉ
             malkummuḷai viḷaivik kalām!
       maṉamotta nēyamoṭu kūṭiyoruvarkkoruvar
             vāḻiṉveku veṟṟi peṟalām!
       aṟṟakaṉi yaipporut taripiramar tēṭariya
             amalaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       --------------
       33. veṟṟi yiṭam
       kalaivalā rukkatika cayam maturavākkilē;
             kāmukark katika cayamō
       kaipporuḷi lē;varum maruttuvark kōcayam
             kaivicē ṭantaṉ ṉilē;
       nalamuṭaiya vēcaiyark kaḻakilē! aracarkku
             nāḷumraṇa cūrat tilē
       naṟṟavark katikacayam ulakupukaḻ poṟaiyilē;
             ñāṉavē tiyarta makkō
       kulamakimai taṉṉilē; vaiciyark kōcayam
             1kūṭiya tulākkō lilē;
       kuṟṟam illātavē ḷāḷaruk kōcayam
             kuṟaiyāta koḻumu ṉaiyilē;
       alaivilkuti raikkunaṭai vēkattil atikacayam
             āmeṉpar; arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       -----------
       34. oṉṟiṉ illāmaiyāṟ pāḻpaṭal
       tāmpūla tāraṇam ilātatē varupūrṇa
             cantraṉnikar mukacū ṉiyam!
       caṟcaṉar ilātatē vekucaṉam cērntuvāḻ
             tarumperiya nakarcū ṉiyam!
       mēmpā ṭilātamaṉ ṉavarkaḷ vantāḷvatē
             mikkatē caccū ṉiyam!
       mikkacaṟ puttiraṉ ilātatē nalamāṉa
             vīṟucēr kirukacū ṉiyam!
       cōmpāta talaivaril lātatē vaḷamuṭaṉ
             colluyar capācū ṉiyam!
       tollulakil aṉaivarkkum mānitiyam illatē
             cuttacū ṉiyameṉ parkāṇ!
       āmpalvata ṉattaṉaik kukaṉaiyīṉ ṟaruḷceyta
             attaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       ----------
             35. mūṭarkaḷil uyarvu tāḻvu
       peṇputti kēṭkiṉṟa mūṭarum, tantaitāy
             piḻaipuṟam colummū ṭarum,
       periyōrkaḷ capaiyilē mukaṭēṟi vantatu
             pitaṟṟiṭum perumū ṭarum,
       paṇpuṟṟa cuṟṟam cirikkavē yiḻivāṉa
             paḻitoḻilcey tiṭumū ṭarum,
       paṟṟaṟṟa pērkkumuṉ piṇainiṉṟu piṉpupōyp
             paritavit tiṭumū ṭarum,
       kaṇkeṭṭa māṭeṉṉa ōṭiyira valarmītu
             kāyntuvīḻn tiṭumū ṭarum,
       kaṟṟaṟi vilātamuḻu mūṭaruk kivarelām
             kālmūṭar araimū ṭarkāṇ
       aṇkaṟṟa nāvalark kākavē tūtupōm
             aiyaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       ----------
             36. itaṟku itu vēṇṭum
       taṉakkuveku puttiyuṇ ṭākiṉum vēṟoruvar
             tamputti kēṭka vēṇṭum;
       tāṉatika cūraṉē ākiṉum kūṭavē
             taḷacēka raṅkaḷ vēṇṭum;
       kaṉakkiṉṟa vittuvāṉ ākiṉum taṉṉiṉum
             kaṟṟōrai natta vēṇṭum;
       kāciṉiyai orukuṭaiyil āṇṭālum vācaliṟ
             karuttuḷḷa mantri vēṇṭum;
       toṉikkiṉṟa caṅkīta cāmarttiyaṉ ākiṉum
             cutikūṭṭa oruvaṉ vēṇṭum;
       cuṭarviḷakku āyiṉum naṉṟāy viḷaṅkiṭat
             tūṇṭukōl oṉṟu vēṇṭum;
       aṉaṟkaṇṇa ṉē!paṭika caṅkamnikar vaṇṇaṉē!
             aiyaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       ---------------
       37. vaṟumaiyiṉ koṭumai
       mēlāṉa cātiyil utittālum atileṉṉa?
             vekuvittai kaṟṟum eṉṉa?
       mikkaati rūpamoṭu caṟkuṇam irunteṉṉa?
             mikumāṉi ākil eṉṉa?
       pālāṉa moḻiyuṭaiyaṉ āyeṉṉa? ācāra
             paraṉāy iruntum eṉṉa?
       pārmītu vīramoṭu ñāṉavāṉ āyeṉṉa?
             pākkiyam ilāta pōtu;
       vālāya māyppeṟṟa tāyum calittiṭuvaḷ!
             vantacuṟ ṟamumi kaḻumē!
       mariyātai illāmal aṉaivarum pēcuvār!
             maṉaiviyum tūṟu colvāḷ!
       ālālam uṇṭakaṉi vāyaṉē! nēyaṉē!
             aṉakaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilni ṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       ----------
       38. iḻivu
       irappavaṉ puvimītil īṉaṉ;ava ṉukkillai
             eṉṉumavaṉ avaṉiṉ īṉaṉ
       īkiṉṟa pērtammai yīyāma lēkalait
             tiṭummūṭaṉ avaṉil īṉaṉ!
       uraikkiṉṟa pēccilē palaṉuṇ ṭeṉakkāṭṭi
             utaviṭāṉ avaṉil īṉaṉ!
       utavavē vākkurait tillaiyeṉ ṟēcolum
             uluttaṉō avaṉil īṉaṉ!
       parakkiṉṟa yācakark kācaivārt taikaḷcolip
             palakāl alaintu tiriyap
       paṇṇiyē illaiyeṉ ṟiṭukoṭiya pāviyē
             pārilel lōrkkum īṉaṉ!
       arakkitaḻk kumutavāy umainēca ṉē!eḷiyar
             amutaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       ----------
             39. maṟaivum veḷippaṭaiyum
       ceṉmitta varuṭamum, uṇṭāṉa attamum,
             tītilkira kaccā ramum,
       tiṉṟuvarum avuṭatamum, mēlāṉa tēcikaṉ
             ceppiya makāmant ramum,
       puṉmaiyava māṉamum, tāṉamum, paimpoṉaṇi
             puṉaiyummaṭa vārka laviyum,
       pukaḻmēvum māṉamum, ivaioṉpa tumtamatu
             puntikku ḷēvaip patē
       taṉmameṉ ṟuraiceyvar; oṉṉār karuttaiyum
             taṉpiṇiyai yumpa ciyaiyum,
       tāṉceyta pāvamum, ivaiyelām vēṟoruvar
             tañceviyil vaippa tiyalpām!
       aṉmaruvu kaṇṭaṉē! mūṉṟulakum īṉṟavumai
             aṉpaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       ------------
             40. vāṉavar kāla aḷavai
       caturyukam ōriraṇ ṭāyiram piṟpaṭiṉ
             catumukaṟ korutiṉa matām!
       cāṟṟumit tiṉamoṉṟi lēyintra paṭṭaṅkaḷ
             tāmumī rēḻceṉ ṟiṭum!
       matimaliyum ittokaiyiṉ ayaṉāyuḷ nūṟupōy
             māṇṭapō torukaṟ pamām!
       māṟivaru kaṟpamoru kōṭiceṉ ṟālneṭiya
             māltaṉak kōrti ṉamatām!
       tutiparavum ittokaiyil orukōṭi neṭiyamāl
             tōṉṟiyē pōyma ṟaintāl
       tōkaiyōr pākaṉē! nīnakait taṇimuṭi
             tuḷakkiṭum kāla meṉpar!
       atikamuḷa palatēvar tēvaṉē! tēvarkaṭ
             karacaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       -------------
       41. tūymai
       vāmpari taṉak katika puṉitammukam ataṉilē;
             maṟaiyavark kuyarpu ṉitamō
       malaraṭiyi lē;puṉitam oḷikoḷkaṇ ṇāṭikku
             mācilmuṟ puṟama taṉilē;
       mēmpaṭum pacuviṉuk kuppiṟ puṟattilē;
             mikkamaṭa māta rukkō
       mēṉiyel lāmpuṉitam ākum;ā caucamoṭu
             mēvuvaṉi taiyarta makkum
       tāmpira mataṟkummiku veḷḷiveṇ kalamayam
             taṅkamī yanta makkum
       tarumpuṉitam varuperuk koṭupuḷi cuṇamcāmpal
             cārummaṇ tātu cāṇam
       āmpuṉitam ivaiyeṉpar; māmēru villiyē!
             aṉakaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatil niṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       42. aṭaṅkātavaṟṟai aṭakkuvataṟku vaḻi
       koṭiyapoli erutaiiru mūkkilum kayiṟoṉṟu
             kōttuvaca virtti koḷvār;
       kuvalayan taṉiṉmatak kaḷiṟataṉai aṅkucaṅ
             koṇṭuvaca virtti koḷvār;
       paṭiyilviṭa aravaiman tiratan tirattiṉāṟ
             paṟṟivaca virtti koḷvār;
       pāypariyai neṭiyakaṭi vāḷamatu koṭunaṭai
             paḻakkivaca virtti koḷvār;
       viṭamuṭaiya tuṭṭaraic cōrpantu kaikkoṇṭu
             vīcivaca vīrtti koḷvār;
       mikkaperi yōrkaḷum kōpattai aṟivāl
             vilakkivaca virtti koḷvār;
       aṭiyavar tutikkavaru centā maraippatat
             taiyaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       43. oḷiyiṉ uyarvu
       ceḻumaṇik koḷi ataṉ maṭṭilē! atiṉumō
             ceyyakac cōtam eṉavē
       ceppiṭum kirumikku miccamoḷi! ataṉiṉum
             tīpattiṉ oḷia tikamām!
       paḻutilāt tīvartti tīpattiṉ atikamām!
             pakalvartti atila tikamām! pa
       āramat tāppiṉoḷi atil atikamām! atilumō
             paṉimatik koḷia tikamām!
       viḻaitaru paritikkum maṉunīti maṉṉarkkum
             vīravita raṇika rukkum
       mikkavoḷi ticaitoṟum pōyviḷaṅ kiṭumeṉṉa
             virakuḷōr uraicey kuvār!
       aḻalviḻiko ṭericeytu mataṉavēḷ taṉaiveṉṟa
             aṇṇalē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       44. naṉṟu tītātal
       vāṉmatiyai nōkkiṭiṉ cōrarkā mukarukku
             māṟāta valvi ṭamatām!
       makiḻnaṉ ṟaṉaikkāṇil itamilā vipacariya
             mā taruk kōvi ṭamatām!
       mēṉmaitaru naṟcuvai patārttamum curarōkam
             mikkapērk katika viṭamām!
       vittiyā tipartamaik kaṇṭapō tatilōpa
             vīṇarkke lāmvi ṭamatām!
       īṉammiku puṉkavi valōrk katika capaikāṇil
             ēlāta koṭiya viṭamām!
       ēṟṟamil lātapaṭu pāvikaṭka ṟameṉṉil
             ennāḷum atika viṭamām!
       āṉatava yōkiyarkaḷ itayatā maraiyuṟaiyum
             aṇṇalē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       45. tāḻvum uyarvupeṟum
       vekumāṉam ākilum avamāṉam ākilum
             mēṉmaiyōr ceyyil aḻakām!
       virakamē ākilum caracamē ākilum
             viḻaimaṅkai ceyyil aḻakām!
       takutāḻvu vāḻvuveku tarumaṅka ḷaicceytu
             cārilō pēra ḻakatām!
       carīrattil ōrūṉam māṉametu vākilum
             camarceytu varila ḻakatām?
       nakammēvu matakariyil ēṟiṉum tavaṟiṉum
             nāḷumatu ōra ḻakatām!
       nāymītil ēṟiṉum vīḻiṉum kaṇṭapēr
             nakaiceytaḻa kaṉṟeṉ parkāṇ!
       akamāyum naṟṟavark karuḷpuriyum aiyaṉē!
             ātiyē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       46. nalviṉai ceytōr
       cāṇeṉak kāttavaṉ, meyyiṉāl veṉṟavaṉ,
             tāṉamiḷai yātu taviṉōṉ,
       tantaicolmaṟātavaṉ, muṉṉavaṟ kāṉavaṉ
             tāḻpaḻi tuṭaitta neṭiyōṉ,
       varupitirk kutaviṉōṉ, teyvamē tuṇaiyeṉṟu
             maintaṉmaṉai viyaiva taittōr,
       māṟāṉa tantaiyait tamaiyaṉaip piḻaikaṇṭu
             māyttulakil makimai peṟṟōr
       karutariya cipiaric cantiraṉ, māpali,
             kaṇicciyōṉ cumitti raicutaṉ,
       karuṭaṉ, pakīrata ṉuṭaṉciṟut toṇṭaṉoṭu
             kāṉavaṉ, piraka lātaṉ,
       ariyaval vipīṭaṇaṉ eṉummakā puruṭarām
             attaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       47. tīviṉai ceytōr
       vāyikaḻvu pēcimiku vāḻviḻan tōṉ, civaṉai
             vaitutaṉ talaipō yiṉōṉ,
       maṟṟoruvar tārattil iccaivaittu uṭalelām
             māṟāta vaṭuvā yiṉōṉ,
       tāyatti ṉōrkkuḷḷa paṅkaik koṭāmalē
             campat tikaḻntu māyntōṉ,
       takkaperi yōrtamai vaṇaṅkā matattiṉāl
             tantivaṭi vāya laintōṉ,
       māyaṉaic capaiyataṉil nintaicey toḷikoḷnava
             maṇimuṭi tuṇintu māyntōṉ,
       varunakuṭa ṉoṭutakkaṉ kuruṭaṉ
             makaṉ, vaḻuti, cicupā laṉām!
       āyumaṟi vāḷaroṭu tēvarpaṇi tāḷaṉē!
             avaṉipukaḻ arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       48. naṉṉakar
       vāvipala kūpamuṭaṉ āṟaruku cērvatāy,
             malaikāta vaḻiyil uḷatāy
       vāḻaikamu koṭuteṅku payirāva tāyc, cennel
             vayalkaḷ vāyk kālka ḷuḷatāy,
       kāvikama lamkuvaḷai cērēri yuḷḷa tāyk,
             kaṉavar tta karkaḷma ṟaivalōr
       kāṇariya palakuṭikaḷ niṟaivuḷḷa tāy, nalla
             kāvalaṉ irukkai yuḷatāyt,
       tēvarā layam āṭal pāṭal aṇi māḷikai
             ciṟakkavuḷa tāyccaṟ caṉar
       cērumiṭam ākumōr ūrkiṭait tatil atika
             cīvaṉamu mēki ṭaittāl
       āvalo ṭiruntiṭuva tēcorkka vācameṉ
             ṟaṟaiyalām! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       49. tīnakar
       īṉacā tikaḷkuṭi yiruppatāy, muḷvēli
             illil liṉukku muḷatāy,
       iṇaimulai tiṟantutam talaivirit tiṭumātar
             eṅkumnaṭa māṭṭam uḷatāyk,
       kāṉamoṭu pakkamāy malaiyōra māy muṟaik
             kāyccaltap pāta iṭamāy,
       kaḷḷarpayamāy, neṭiya kayiṟiṭ ṭiṟaikkiṉṟa
             kaṟkēṇi nīruṇ patāy.
       māṉamil lākkoṭiya turccaṉar tamakkēṟṟa
             maṇiyamoṉ ṟuṇṭā ṉatāy,
       mānilat tōrtalam iruntataṉil vekuvāḻvu
             vāḻvatilum, aruka rakilē
       āṉaneṭu nāḷkiṭantamiḻtalē cukamākum
             amalaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       50. muḻukkunāḷ
       varum āti vāram talaik keṇṇey ākātu
             vaṭivamikum aḻaku pōkum;
       vaḷartiṅ ḷukkatika poruḷcērum; aṅkāra
             vāram taṉakki ṭarvarum
       tirumēvu putaṉukku mikuputti vantiṭum;
             cempoṉuk kuyar aṟivupōm;
       tēṭiya poruṭcētam āmveḷḷi; caṉiyeṇṇey
             celvamuṇ ṭāyu ḷuṇṭām;
       parikāram uḷatāti vāram taṉakkalari;
             paumaṉuk kāṉa ceḻumaṇ
       paccaṟuku poṉṉavaṟ kām; erut tūḷoḷip
             pārkkavaṟ kākum eṉavē;
       aritā aṟintapēr eṇṇeycērt tēmuḻuk
             kāṭuvār; arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       51. maruttuvaṉ
       tātup parīṭcaivaru kālatē cattōṭu
             carīralaṭ caṇama ṟintu,
       taṉvantri kumpamuṉi tērarkoṅ kaṇarcittar
             tamatuvā kaṭama ṟintu
       pētap peruṅkuḷikai cuttivakai māttiraip
             pirayōka mōṭu pasmam
       piḻaiyātu maṇṭūra centūra laṭcaṇam
             pērpeṟuṅ kuṇavā kaṭam
       cōtittu, mūlikā vitanikaṇ ṭuṅkaṇṭu
             tūyatai lamlē kiyam
       colpakku vamkaṇṭu varurōka niṇṇayam
             tōṟṟiyē amirta karaṉāy,
       ātip peruṅkēḷvi yuṭaiyaṉ ā yurvētaṉ
             ākum; ema tarumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       52. uṇmaiyuṇar kuṟi
       cōtiṭam poyyātu meyyeṉpa taṟivariya
             cūḻkiraka ṇamcāṭci ām!
       coṟperiya vākaṭam nicameṉkai pētitaru
             tūyamāt tiraicāṭci ām!
       ātiyiṟ ceytatavam uṇṭillai eṉpataṟ
             kāḷaṭimai yēcāṭci ām!
       aritēva tēvaṉeṉ pataiyaṟiya mutalnūl
             ariccuvaṭi yēcāṭci ām!
       nātaṉē mātēvaṉ eṉpataṟ kōrutra
             namakacama kamcāṭci ām!
       nāyēṉai raṭcippa tuṉpāram! ariyayaṉ
             nāḷum arc caṉaicey caraṇat
       tātinā yakamikka vētanā yakaṉāṉa
             aṇṇalē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       53. piṟavikkuṇam māṟātu
       kalaṅkāta, cittamum, celvamum, ñālamum,
             kalviyum, karuṇai viḷaivum,
       karutariya vaṭivamum pōkamum, tiyākamum,
             kaṉarūpam uḷamaṅ kaiyum,
       alaṅkāta vīramum, poṟumaiyum, tantiramum,
             āṇmaiyum, amuta moḻiyum,
       āṉaic ceyalelām caṉaṉavā caṉaiyiṉāl
             ākivarum aṉṟi, nilamēl
       nalamcērum oruvaraip pārttatu peṟakkarutiṉ
             naṇṇumō? rastā ḷitaṉ
       naṟcuvai taṉakkuvara vēmputava mēneṭitu
             nāḷceyiṉum vārā tukāṇ!
       alaṅkāram ākamalar koṉṟaimā likaicūṭum
             aṇṇalē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē.
       54. ūḻvali
       kaṭalaḷa vuraittiṭuvar, aripiramar uruvamum
             kāṇum paṭikku raiceyvar,
       kāciṉiyiṉ aḷavupira māṇamatu colluvār
             kāyattiṉ nilaimai aṟivār,
       viṭalariya cīvanilai kāṭṭuvār mūccaiyum
             viṭāmal taṭutta ṭakki
       mēṉmēlum yōkacā taṉaiviḷaip pār, eṭṭi
             viṇmīti ṉumtā vuvār,
       toṭalariya piramanilai kāṭṭuvār, eṇvakait
             tokaiyāṉa citti yaṟivār,
       cūḻviṉai varumpoḻutu cikkiyuḻal vār! atu
             tuṭaikkavoru nāṉmu kaṟkum
       aṭaivala eṉatterin taḷavilpala nūlcollum
             aṇṇalē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       55. uyarvu illātavai
       vētiyark katikamām cātiyum, kaṉakamaka
             mēruvukku atika malaiyum,
       veṇtirai koḻittuvaru kaṅkā natikkatika
             mētiṉiyil ōṭu natiyum
       cōtitarum ātavaṟ katikamām kāntiyum,
             cūḻkaṉaṟ katika cuciyum
       tūyatāy tantaikku mēlāṉa teyvamum,
             curutik kuyarnta kalaiyum,
       ātivaṭa moḻitaṉakkatikamām moḻiyum, nukar
             aṉṉatā ṉanta ṉilumōr
       atikatā ṉamumillai eṉṟupala nūlelām
             ārāynta pēru raiceyvār!
       ātavaṉ piramaṉviṇ ṇavar muṉivar paravavarum
             aṇṇalē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē.
       56. vīṇar
       vēṭṭakam cērvōrum vīṇarē! vīṇurai
             virumpuvōr avariṉ vīṇar!
       viruntukaṇ ṭillāḷ taṉakkañciōṭimaṟai
             virakilōr avariṉ vīṇar!
       nāṭṭam tarumkalvi yillōrum vīṇarē!
             nāṭi avar mēṟkavi colvār
       nāṉilan taṉilvīṇar! avariṉum vīṇarē
             nararaic cumakkum eḷiyōr!
       tēṭṭaṟivi lātaperu vīṇarē avariṉum
             cēroru varattum iṉṟic
       celavucey vōr atika vīṇarām! vīṇaṉāyt
             tiriyumeḷi yēṉai āṭkoṇ
       ṭāṭṭañce yumpatām puyammuṭiyiṉ mēlvaitta
             amalaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       57. keṭuvaṉa
       mūpporuvar illāta kumarikuṭi vāḻkkaiyum,
             mūtaraṇ ilāta nakarum,
       moḻiyumveku nāyakar cēriṭamum, varumetukai
             mōṉaiyil lāta kaviyum
       kāppamai vilātatōr nantavaṉa mum,nalla
             karaiyilā niṟaiyē riyum,
       kacaṭaṟak kaṟkāta vittaiyum, upatēca
             kāraṇaṉ ilāta teḷivum,
       kōppuḷa vinōtamuṭai yōraruku pukaḻāta
             kōtaiyarcey kūttāṭ ṭamum,
       kuḷirpuṉal niṟaintuvarum āṟṟōram atiṉiṉṟu
             kōṭuyarn tōṅku taruvum,
       āppatil lātatēr ivaiyelām oṉṟākum
             aiyaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       58. ivaiyē pōtum
       poyyāta vāymaiyum cīlamum cārntuḷōr
             pūvalam ceyavēṇ ṭumō?
       pollāta kolaikaḷa vilātanaṉ ṉeṟiyuḷōr
             pukaḻaṟam ceyavēṇ ṭumō?
       naiyāta kāmattai lōpattai viṭṭapēr
             nallaṟam ceyavēṇ ṭumō?
       naṉmaṉō cuttiyuṇ ṭāṉapēr mēlumoru
             natipaṭin tiṭavēṇ ṭumō?
       meyyāniṉ aṭiyaraip paravuvōr uṉpatam
             virumpivaḻi paṭavēṇ ṭumō?
       vētiyar tamaippūcai paṇṇuvōr vāṉavarai
             vēṇṭi arc caṉaicey varō?
       aiyā ṟuṭaṉkamalai cōṇā calantillai
             atipaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       59. ariyar
       patiṉmaril oruttarcapai mecciṭap pēcuvōr!
             pāṭuvōr nūṟṟil oruvar!
       pārmītil āyirat toruvarviti tappātu
             pāṭipra caṅka miṭuvōr!
       itaṉarumai aṟikuvōr patiṉā yirattoruvar!
             itaiyaṟin titayam makiḻvāy
       īkiṉṟa pērpuviyi lēarumai yākavē
             ilakkatti lēyo ruvarām!
       tutiperuka varummūṉṟu kālamum aṟintameyt
             tūyarkō ṭiyilo ruvar ām.
       tollulaku pukaḻkāci yēkām paramkailai
             cūḻumavi nāci pērūr
       atikamuḷa veṇkāṭu ceṅkāṭu kāḷatti
             attaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       60. kaṟpu mēmpāṭu
       taṉkaṇavaṉ uruvamāyt taṟpuṇara vantōṉ
             taṉakkiṇaṅ kāta niṟaiyāḷ,
       taḻaṟkatir eḻāmalum poḻutuviṭi yāmalum
             cāpam koṭutta ceyalāḷ,
       maṉṉivaḷar aḻalmūḻki ulakaṟiya vētaṉatu
             makiḻnaṉaic cērnta parivāḷ,
       maintaṉaic cuṭavanta iṟaivaṉ taṭintavaṭi
             vāḷmālai yāṉa kaṉivāḷ,
       naṉṉati paṭintiṭuva teṉṉaār aḻalmūḻki
             nāyakaṉai mēvu tayavāḷ,
       nāṉilam pukaḻcāli, pērpeṟu naḷāyiṉi,
             naḷiṉamalar mēlvai tēki
       aṉṉameṉa varucantra matiturō pataiyeṉpar
             ātiyē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       61. kōṭi uṭukkum nāḷ
       kaṟaipaṭā toḷicērum ātivā rantaṉiṟ
             kaṭṭalām putiya cīlai;
       kalaimatik kākātu; palakālum maḻaiyiṉiṟ
             kaṭitunaṉai vuṟṟo ḻitarum;
       kuṟaipaṭā tiṭarvarum; vīriyampōm, ariya
             kurutivā ranta ṉakku;
       koñcanā ḷiṟkiḻiyum, veṟṟipōm puntiyil;
             kuruvāra matila ṇintāl,
       maṟaipaṭā taḻakuṇṭu, mēṉmēlum nallāṭai
             varum; iṉiya cukki raṟkō
       vāḻvuṇṭu, tiruvuṇṭu, pollāta caṉiyaṟku
             vāḻvupōm, maraṇam uṇṭām;
       aṟaikiṉṟa vētāka mattiṉvaṭi vāyviḷaṅ
             kamalaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       62. cakuṉam - 1
       collariya karuṭaṉvā ṉaramaravam mūñciṟu
             cūkaram kīri kalaimāṉ
       tuyyapā ratvācam aṭṭaieli puṉkūkai
             coṟperuka maruvum āntai
       vellariya karaṭikāṭ ṭāṉpūṉai pulimēl
             viḷaṅkumiru nā uṭumpu
       mikavuraicey ivaiyelām valamirun tiṭamākil
             veṟṟiyuṇ ṭatika nalamām;
       ollaiyiṉ vaḻippayaṇam ākumavar talaitākkal,
             orutuṭai yiruttal, paṟṟal,
       orutummal, āṇaiyiṭal, irumal, pō kēleṉṉa
             upacuruti coli vaiyelām
       allaltarum nallaala eṉpar; muti yōrparavum
             amalaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       63. cakuṉam - 2
       narimayil pacuṅkiḷḷai kōḻikok koṭukākkai
             nāvicik ciliyōn titāṉ
       naraiyāṉ kaṭuttavāyc cempōt tuṭaṉmēti
             nāṭariya curapi maṟaiyōr
       variyuḻuvai muyalivai yaṉaittumvalam āyiṭiṉ
             vaḻippayaṇam ākai naṉṟām;
       maṟṟumivai aṉṟiyē kutiraiaṉu māṉittal,
             vāyccolvā vāveṉ ṟiṭal,
       taruvaḷai toṉittiṭutal, kompukiṭu muṭiyaracu
             tappaṭṭai olival vēṭṭu
       taṉimaṇi muḻakkeḻutal ivaiyelām ūrvaḻi
             taṉakkēka naṉmai yeṉpar!
       aruṇakira ṇōtayat taruṇapā ṉuvaiyaṉaiya
             aṇṇalē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       64. cakuṉam - 3
       talaivirit tetirvarutal, oṟṟaip pirāmaṇaṉ,
             tavaci, cannāci, taṭṭāṉ,
       taṉamilā veṟumārpi, mūkkaṟai, pul, viṟukutalai,
             taṭṭaimuṭi, moṭṭait talai,
       kalaṉkaḻi maṭantaiyar, kucakkalam, cekkāṉ,
             katittatila tailam, ivaikaḷ
       kāṇavetir varavoṇā; nīrkkuṭam, erukkūṭai,
             kaṉi, pulāl upaya maṟaiyōr
       nalammiku cumaṅkalai, kiḻaṅku, cūtakamaṅkai
             nāḷumvaṇ ṇāṉa ḻukku
       nacaiperuku pāṟkalacam, maṇi, vaḷaiyal malarivaikaḷ
             nāṭiyetir varanaṉ maiyām;
       alaikoṇṭa kaṅkaipuṉai vēṇiyāy! paracaṇiyum
             aṇṇalē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       65. uṇavil vilakku
       kaivilaik kukkoḷum pāl acap pāl, varum
             kārāk kaṟanta veṇpāl
       kāḷāṉ, muruṅkai, curai, kommaṭi, paḻaccōṟu
             kāntik karinta cōṟu,
       cevvaiyil ciṟukkīrai, pīrkkatti, veḷḷuppu,
             teṉṉai vellam lāvakam,
       cīrilā veḷḷuḷḷi, īruḷḷi, iṅkuvoṭu
             ciṟappilveṇ katta rikkāy,
       evvamil civaṉkōyil nirmāli yam kiraṇam,
             ilakucuṭa rillā tavūṇ,
       ivaiyelām cīlamuṭai yōrkaḷuk kākā
             eṉappaḻaiya nūlurai ceyum
       aivakaip pulaṉveṉṟa muṉivarviṇ ṇavarpōṟṟum
             amalaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       66. naṟporuḷiṟ kuṟṟam
       pērāṉa kaṅkā natikkum ataṉ mēlvarum
             pēṉamē tōṭa mākum!
       perukivaḷar veṇmatik kuḷḷuḷ kaḷaṅkamē
             peritāṉa tōṭa mākum!
       cīrām tapō taṉark koruvarmēl varukiṉṟa
             cīṟṟamē tōṭa mākum!
       tītilmuṭi maṉṉavar vicāritti ṭātoṉṟu
             ceyvatavar mēltō ṭamām!
       tārāḷa māmikat tantuḷōr tārāmai
             tāṉirap pōrtō ṭamām!
       cāramuḷa naṟkarup pañcāṟu kaippatavar
             tālamcey tōṭa mākum!
       ārāyum orunāṉ maṟaikkumeṭṭātoḷirum
             aṇṇalē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       67. maṉai kōluvataṟku mātam
       cittirait tiṅkaḷtaṉil maṉaikōla maṉaipukac
             celvamuṇ ṭatiṉum nalamē
       cērumvai kācikku; mēṉāḷ araṉpuram
             tīyiṭṭa tāṉi yākā;
       veṟṟikoḷ irākavaṉ tēviciṟai cērkaṭakam
             vīṟalla; āva ṇicukam;
       mēviṭuṅ kaṉṉiyira ṇiyaṉ māṇṭa tākātu;
             mēṉmaiyuṇ ṭaippa cikkē;
       uttamam kārttikaik kākātu mārkaḻiyil
             ōṅkupā ratamvan tanāḷ;
       uyarvuṇṭu makarattil; mācimā tattilviṭam
             umparkōṉ uṇṭa tākātu;
       attanī! māraṉai erittapaṅ kuṉitāṉum
             ākumō! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       68. viruntu vāram
       ceṅkatirk kuṟavupōm, pakaivarum, viruntoruvar
             ceyyoṇā tuṇṇo ṇātu;
       tiṅkaḷuk kuṟavuṇṭu; naṉmaiyām; pakaivarum
             cevvāy virunta runtār;
       poṅkuputaṉ naṉmaiyuṇ ṭuṟavām; viruntuṇap
             poṉṉavaṟ katika pakaiām;
       pukaravaṟ kākilō neṭunāḷ virōtamāyp
             pōṉavuṟa vunti rumpum;
       maṅkulnikar caṉivāram nallatām; itaṉiṉum
             maṉamot tirunta iṭamē
       vālāya māyppōy viruntuṇa viruntutava
             vāyttanāḷ eṉṟa ṟiyalām;
       aṅkaiyil viḷaṅkivaḷar tuṅkamaḻu vāḷaṉē!
             aṇṇalē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       69. pūppu vāram
       arukkaṉuk katirōki yāvaḷ;naṟ cōmaṉuk
             kāṉakaṟ puṭaiya ḷāvāḷ;
       aṅkāra kaṟkuveku tukkiyā vāḷ;punti
             aḷavilpaiṅ kuḻavi peṟuvāḷ;
       tiruttaku viyāḻattiṉ mikkacam pattiṉoṭu
             ciṟuvaraip peṟṟe ṭuppāḷ;
       cīruṭaiya pārkkavaṟ katipōka vatiyumām;
             tiruvumuṇ ṭāyi ruppāḷ;
       karuttaḻintu eḻilkuṉṟi vaṟumaikoṇṭu alaikuvāḷ
             kārivā ratti lākil;
       kaḷapamulai maṭamātar puṭpavati yāmvāra
             kālapalaṉ eṉṟu raiceyvār;
       aruttiyuṭaṉ eḷiyēṉai āṭkoṇṭa cōtiyē!
             aṇṇalē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       70. pūppu ilakkiṉam
       vaṟumaitap pātuvarum mēṭattil; iṭapattil
             māṟātu vipacā riām;
       vāḻvuṇṭu pōkamuṇ ṭākummitu ṉam; kaṭakam
             valitiṉiṟ piṟarai aṇaivāḷ;
       ciṟumaiceyum miṭicērvaḷ mirukēn tiraṟkeṉil
             cīrpeṟuvaḷ kaṉṉi yeṉṉil;
       ceṭṭuṭaiyaḷ tulaiyeṉil; piṇiyāl melintiṭuvaḷ
             tēḷiṉuk kut; taṉucueṉil
       neṟicitaivaḷ, pūruvat taparaneṟi uṭaiyaḷām;
             nīḷmakaram māṉa milaḷām;
       niṟaipōka vatikumpam eṉil; mīṉam eṉṉilō
             neṭiyapē raṟivu ṭaiyaḷām;
       aṟivāḷar maṭamātar tamaiyaṟi irācipalaṉ
             atuveṉpar; arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       71. tīvum kaṭalum
       nāvalan tīviṉaic cūḻtarum kaṭalaḷavu
             laṭcamyō caṉai;i taṉaiyē
       nāḷtoṟum cūḻvatila vantīvu; ataiccūḻtal
             naṟkaḻaic cāṟṟiṉ kaṭal;
       mēvumitu cūḻvatu kucattīva taiccūḻtal
             mikumatuk kaṭal;a taṉaiyē
       viḻaivoṭum cūḻtalkira vuñcatī vamitaṉiṉ
             mēṟcūḻtal neykka ṭalatām;
       pūvilitu cūḻtalcā kattīvam; iṅkitaip
             pōrppatu tiruppāṟ kaṭal;
       pōvatatu cūḻtalcāṉ malitīvam ām; tayirp
             puṇariap pālum appāl
       āvaluṟu puṭkarat tīvām itaiccūḻva
             tarumpuṉaṟ ṟarumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       72. māṇikkaṅkaḷ
       cuḻicutta māyiruntatilum paṭaikkāṉa
             turakamōr māṇik kamām;
       cūḻpuvik karacaṉāy atilēvi vēkamuḷa
             turaiyumōr māṇik kamām;
       paḻutaṟṟa atirūpa vatiyumāyk kaṟpuṭaiya
             pāvaiyōr māṇik kamām;
       palakalaikaḷ kaṟṟaṟi aṭakkamuḷa pāvalaṉ
             pārkkilōr māṇik kamām;
       oḻivaṟṟa celvaṉāy atilē vivēkiyām
             ucitaṉōr māṇik kamām;
       uttama kulattutit tatilumō meyññāṉam
             uṭaiyaṉōr māṇik kamām;
       aḻivaṟṟa vētāka mattiṉvaṭi vāyviḷaṅ
             kamalaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       73. uṇṭiyilaiyum muṟaiyum
       vāḻaiyilai puṉṉaipura cuṭaṉnaṟ kurukkatti
             māppalāt teṅku paṉṉīr
       mācilamu tuṇṇalām; uṇṇāta vō aracu
             vaṉacam ceḻumpā ṭalam
       tāḻaiyilai attiāl ēraṇṭapattiram
             cakatēvam muḷmu rukkuc
       cārumivai aṉṟi, veṇ pāleruk kiccililai
             taṉiṉumuṇ ṭiṭavo ṇātāl;
       tāḻvilāc ciṟṟuṇṭi nīraṭik kaṭiparukal
             cātaṅkaḷ palaa runtal
       caṟṟuṇṭal mettavūṇ ittaṉaiyum meyppiṇi
             taṉakkiṭam eṉappa rukiṭār;
       āḻipuṭai cūḻulakil vēḷāḷar kulatilakaṉ
             ākumema tarumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē.
       74. kaviñar vaṟumai
       eḻutap paṭikkavakai teriyāta mūṭaṉai
             iṇaiyilāc cēṭaṉ eṉṟum,
       īvatil lātakaṉa lōpiyaic capaiyataṉil
             iṇaiyilāk karṇaṉ eṉṟum,
       aḻakaṟṟa vekukōra rūpattai yuṭaiyōṉai
             ativaṭi māraṉ eṉṟum,
       āyutam eṭukkavun teriyāta pēṭitaṉai
             āṇmaimiku vicayaṉ eṉṟum,
       muḻuvatum poycolli alaikiṉṟa vañcakaṉai
             moḻiaric cantra ṉeṉṟum,
       mūtulakil ivvaṇam colliyē kavirācar
             muṟaiyiṉṟi ēṟpa teṉṉō?
       aḻaleṉa utittuvaru viṭamuṇṭa kaṇṭaṉē!
             amalaṉē! arumai matavēḷ!
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       75. kaviñaṉ
       teḷḷamirta tāraiyeṉa maturam katittapain
             tēṉmaṭai tiṟanta teṉavē
       ceppumut tamiḻiṉoṭu nāṟkavitai nāṟporuḷ
             terinturaicey tiṟamai yuṭaṉē
       viḷḷariya kāviyat tuṭporuḷ alaṅkāram
             virivilak kaṇavi kaṟpam
       vēṟumuḷa toṉṉūl vaḻakkumula kattiyalpum
             mikkapra panta vaṇmai
       uḷḷavel lāmaṟin talaiyaṭaṅ kuṅkaṭalai
             yottatika capaikaṇ ṭapō
       tōṅkalai yolikkiṉṟa kaṭalpōṟpra caṅkama
             turaippavaṉ kaviña ṉākum!
       aḷḷiviṭam uṇṭakaṉi vāyaṉē! nēyaṉē!
             amalaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       76. naṟcārpu
       kāṇariya periyōrkaḷ taricaṉam lapippatē
             kaṇṇiṇaikaḷ ceypuṇ ṇiyam;
       karuṇaiyāy avarcolmoḻi kēṭṭiṭa lapippatuiru
             kātucey tiṭupuṇ ṇiyam;
       pēṇiavar pukaḻaiyē tuticeya lapittiṭutal
             pēcilvāy ceypuṇ ṇiyam;
       piḻaiyāmal avartamait toḻutiṭa lapippatukai
             peritucey tiṭupuṇ ṇiyam;
       vīṇeṟice lāmalavar paṇiviṭai lapippatutaṉ
             mēṉicey tiṭupuṇ ṇiyam;
       viḻaivoṭavar coṟpaṭi naṭantiṭa lapippatē
             mikkapū ruvapuṇṇiyam;
       āṇavam eṉuṅkaḷai kaḷaintaṟi viṉaittanta
             aṇṇalē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       77. piṟantanāḷuṭaṉ varum vārattiṉ palaṉ
       ceṉmanaṭ cattirat tātivā ramvariṉ
             tīrā alaicca luṇṭām;
       tiṅkaḷuk kākilveku cukapō caṉattiṉoṭu
             tirumātiṉ aruḷum uṇṭām,
       vaṉmaitarum aṅkāra vāramvan tāṟciṟitum
             vārātu cukama teṉpār;
       mācilpala kalaipayilvar mēṉmaiyām puntiyeṉum
             vārat tuṭaṉkū ṭiṉāl;
       naṉmaitaru kuruvāra matucērntu varilāṭai
             naṉmaiyuṭa ṉēvan tiṭum;
       nāriya ruṭaṉpōkam mikavumuṇ ṭoruveḷḷi
             nallavā rattil vantāl;
       aṉmaruvu pīṭaiyuṇ ṭāmeṉpar caṉiyaṉuk(ku);
             amalaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       78. ētu?
       poṉṉācai uḷḷavark kuṟavētu? kuruvētu?
             poṅkupaci yuḷḷa pērkkup
       pōtavē cuciyētu? ruciyētu? mayalkoṇṭu
             potumātar valaivi ḻiyilē
       ennāḷum alaipavark kaccamoṭu veṭkamē
             teṉṟeṉṟum uṟukal vimēl
       iccaiyuḷa pērkkatika cukamētu? tuyilētu?
             veḷitāy iruntu koṇṭē
       paṉṉāḷum alaipavark kikaḻētu? pukaḻētu?
             pāriloru varkka tikamē
       paṇṇiyiṭu mūṭaruk kaṟamētu maṟamalāl?
             pakarnirayam oṉṟu ḷatukāṇ!
       aṉṉāṇa varukari urittaṇiyum meyyaṉē!
             amalaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       79. maḻaināḷ kuṟippu
       cittirait tiṅkaḷ patiṉ mūṉṟukku mēlnalla
             cīrāṉa paraṇi maḻaiyum,
       tītilvai kāciyiṟ pūraṇai kaḻintapiṉ
             cērumnā lānā ḷiṉil
       ottuvaru maḻaiyum, av vāṉiyil tēypiṟaiyil
             ōṅkumē kāta ciyiṉil
       oḷirpariti vīḻpoḻutil mantāra mum maḻaiyum,
             uṇṭā yiruntāṭiyil
       pattivaru tēti aintiṉil āti vāramum
             pakarumā vaṇimū lanāḷ
       paritiyum maṟaintiṭak kaṉamaḻai poḻintiṭap
             pārilveku viḷaivum uṇṭām;
       attaṉē! paiṅkuvaḷai mālaiyaṇi mārpaṉ ām
             aṇṇal ematarumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       80. payaṉilātavai
       camayattil utavāta nitiyamēṉ? mikkatuyar
             cārpoḻutu ilāta kiḷaiēṉ?
       capai mukattuta vāta kalviēṉ? etirivaru
             camarattilāta paṭaiēṉ?
       vimalaṉuk kutavāta pūcaiēṉ? nāḷumiruḷ
             vēḷaikkilāta cuṭarēṉ?
       vempacikkutavāta aṉṉam ēṉ? nīṭukuḷir
             vēḷaik kilāta kalaiēṉ?
       tamatutaḷar vēḷaik kilātaōr maṉaiviēṉ?
             caracat tilātanakai ēṉ?
       cāmmaraṇa kālattil utavāta putalvaṉ ēṉ?
             taraṇimī teṉpar kaṇṭāy!
       amararkkum muṉivarkkum oruvarkkum eṭṭāta
             ātiyē! arumaimata vēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       81. maṟaiyōr ciṟappu
       ōrāṟu toḻilaiyum kaiviṭār; caucaviti
             oṉṟutap pātu purivār;
       utayāti yiṟceṉṟu nīrpaṭiku vār; kālam
             orumūṉṟi ṉukkum maṟavā
       tārāyntu kāyatri yatucepip pār;nāḷum
             atitipū caikaḷpaṇ ṇuvār;
       yākāti karumaṅkaḷ mantrakiri yālōpam
             iṉṟiyē ceytu varuvār;
       pērācai koṇṭiṭār; vaitikanaṉ mārkkamē
             piḻaiyā tirukkum maṟaiyōr
       peyyeṉap peyyummu kil;avarmaki maiyevarkaḷum
             pēcutaṟ karita ritukāṇ!
       ārār neṭuñcaṭila amalaṉē! eṉaiyāḷum
             aṇṇalē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       82. aracar ciṟappu
       maṉunīti muṟaimaiyum, pararācar koṇṭāṭa
             varumatika raṇavī ramum,
       vāḷ vicaya moṭucaraca cātaṉa vicēṭamum,
             vācimata kariyēṟ ṟamum,
       kaṉamām amaiccarum, palamāṉa turkkamum,
             kaikaṇṭa pōrppa ṭaiñarum,
       kacarata patātiyum, turakapra vākamum
             kāla tēcaṅka ḷevaiyum
       iṉitāy aṟintatā ṉāpatika ḷoṭucamark
             kiḷaiyāta taḷakart tarum,
       eṉṟumvaṟ ṟātataṉa tāṉiya camuttiramum,
             ēṟṟamuḷa kuṭivark kamum,
       aṉaivōrum mecca iṅkivaiyelām uṭaiyapēr
             aracarām! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       83. vaṇikar ciṟappu
       nīḷkaṭal kaṭantiṭuvar; malaiyāḷa mumpōvar!
             neṭitutū ranti rintum
       niṉaivutaṭu māṟārkaḷ; caliyārkaḷ; poruḷtēṭi
             nīḷnilat taracu puriyum
       vāḷuḻava raittamatu kaivacam ceyvārkaḷ;
             varumiṭam varāta iṭamum
       maṉattaiyum aṟintutavi oṉṟunū ṟāyiṭa
             vaḷarppar;varu tolaito laikkum
       āḷviṭuvar;malivukuṟai vatuvicā rittiṭuvar
             aḷavilpaṟ palaca rakkum
       amaivuṟak koḷvar;viṟ pārkaṇak katilaṇuvum
             aṟaviṭār; celavu varilō
       āḷiyot tēmalaiyiṉ aḷavum koṭuttiṭuvar
             aruḷ vaiciyar! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       84. vēḷāḷar ciṟappu
       yacaṉāti karumamum tappāmal vētiyar
             iyaṟṟinal lērpe ṟuvatum,
       irācyapā rañceytu muṭimaṉṉar veṟṟikoṇ
             ṭeṉṟumnal lērpe ṟuvatum,
       vacaṉāti tappātu taṉatā ṉiyan tēṭi
             vaciyarnal lērpe ṟuvatum,
       maṟṟumuḷa pērelām miṭiyeṉṟi ṭātatika
             vaḷamaipeṟ ṟērpe ṟuvatum,
       ticaitōṟum uḷḷapala tēvā layampūcai
             ceyyunal lērpe ṟuvatum,
       cīrkoṇṭa paiṅkuvaḷai mālaipuṉai vēḷāḷar
             ceyyummē ḻippe rumaikāṇ
       acaiyātu veḷḷimalai taṉilmēvi vāḻkiṉṟa
             aṇṇalē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       85. tāṉāpati, amaiccaṉ, paṭaittalaivaṉ
       taṉṉaracaṉ valimaiyum, pararācar eṇṇamum,
             cālamēl varuka rumamum
       tāṉaṟin tatiputti uttiyuṇ ṭāyiṉōṉ
             tāṉāti patiyā kuvāṉ;
       maṉṉavar maṉattaiyum, kālatē cattaiyum,
             vāḻkuṭi paṭaitti ṟamaiyum,
       mantirā lōcaṉai yumellām aṟintavaṉ
             vaḷamāṉa matiman tiri;
       tuṉṉiya paṭaikkuṇam karipari parīṭcaiyē,
             cūḻpakaivar puricūḻc ciyum,
       tōlāta veṟṟiyum tiṭamāṉa cittiyuḷa
             cūraṉē cēṉā tipaṉ
       aṉṉaiyiṉum nallamalai maṅkaipaṅ kāḷaṉē!
             aṉakaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       86. aracavaik kaṇakkar
       varumōlai uttarat teḻutivaru poruḷiṉāl
             varaviṭup pōṉma ṉataiyum,
       maruvivaru karumamum tēcakā lattaiyum
             varukara talāma lakamāy
       viraivāy aṟintaracar eṇṇileṇ ṇiṉaiyaḷa
             viṭaeḻu tavācik kavum
       veṟṟikoṇ ṭēperiya puttiyuṭai yōṉpuvi yiṉ
             mēṉmairā yacakā raṉām;
       karuvāy aṟintu tokai yīrāṟu noṭiyiṉiṟ
             kaṭitēṟ ṟiṭakku ṟaikkak
       kaṭukaiyoru malaiyāka malaiyaiyoru kaṭukumāk
             kāṭṭuvōṉ karuṇī kaṉām;
       aruvāki uruvāki oḷiyāki veḷiyākum
             aṇṇalē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       87. cīṟṟattiṉ koṭumai
       kōpamē pāvaṅkaḷuk kellām tāytantai!
             kōpamē kuṭike ṭukkum!
       kōpamē oṉṟaiyum kūṭivara voṭṭātu!
             kōpamē tuyarko ṭukkum!
       kōpamē pollātu! kōpamē cīrkēṭu!
             kōpamē uṟava ṟukkum!
       kōpamē paḻiceyum! kōpamē pakaiyāḷi!
             kōpamē karuṇai pōkkum!
       kōpamē īṉamām kōpamē evaraiyum
             kūṭāmal oruva ṉākkum!
       kōpamē maṟalimuṉ koṇṭupōyt tīyanara
             kakkuḻi yiṉiltaḷ ḷumāl!
       āpatte lāntavirt teṉṉaiyāṭ koṇṭaruḷum
             aṇṇalē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       88. paltuṟai
       tāmpuri tavattaiyum koṭaiyaiyum pukaḻuvōr
             taṅkaḷuk kavaita ḻuvuṟā!
       caṟṟumaṟi villāmal antaṇarai nintaicey
             tayavilōr āyuḷ perukār!
       mēmpaṭu naṟuṅkalavai mālaitayir pālpulāl
             vīṭunaṟ cennel ivaikaḷ
       vēṟoruvar tantiṭiṉum maṉumoḻi yaṟintapēr
             vilaikoṭut tēkoḷ ḷuvār!
       tēṉkaṉi kiḻaṅkuviṟa kilaiyivai yaṉaittaiyum
             tīṇṭariya nīcar eṉiṉum
       cīrpeṟa aḷipparēl ikaḻātu kaikkoḷvar
             cīlamuṭai yōreṉ parāl!
       āṉkoṭi yuyarttavumai nēcaṉē! īcaṉē!
             aṇṇalē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       89. mupporuḷ (tattuvat tirayam)
       pūtamō raintuṭaṉ, pulaṉaintum, ñāṉam
             poruntumin tiriya maintum,
       poruvilkaṉ mēntiriyam aintum, maṉam ātiyām
             pukalariya karaṇam nāṉkum,
       ōtiṉōr ivai āṉma tattuvam eṉac colvar;
             uyarkāla niyati kalaiyō
       ṭōṅkivaru vittai, rākam, puruṭaṉ māyai yeṉ
             ṟuraiceyyum ōrē ḻumē
       tītilvit yātatvam eṉṟiṭuvar; ivaiyalāl
             tikaḻcutta vittai īcaṉ,
       cīrkoḷcā tākkiyam, catti, civam aintumē
             civatatvam eṉṟa ṟaikuvār;
       ātivaṭa nīḻaliṟ caṉakāti yārkkaruḷ cey
             aṇṇalē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē.
       90. kāmaṉ ampum avaṟṟiṉ paṇpu mutaliyaṉavum
       vaṉacam, ceḻuñcūta muṭaṉ, acō kamtaḷavam,
             malarnīlam ivaiain tumē
       māravēḷ kaṇaikaḷām; ivaiceyum kuṇam; muḷari
             maṉatilā caiyaiye ḻuppum;
       viṉaviloṇ cūtamalar meyppacalai uṇṭākkum;
             mikaacō kamtu yarceyum;
       vīḻttiṭum kuḷir mullai; nīlamuyir pōkkiviṭum;
             mēvumivai ceyuma vattai;
       niṉaivilatu vēnōkkam, vēṟoṉṟil ācaiyaṟal,
             neṭṭuyirp poṭupi taṟṟal,
       neñcam tiṭukkiṭutal, aṉam veṟuttiṭal, kāyccal
             nērtal, mauṉam purikutal,
       aṉaivuyir uṇṭillai eṉṉalī raintum ām!
             attaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       91. kāmaṉ tuṇaipporuḷkaḷ
       veñcilai ceḻuṅkaḻai;vil nārikaru vaṇṭiṉam;
             mēlviṭum kaṇaikaḷ alarām;
       vīciṭum teṉṟaltēr; paiṅkiḷḷai yēparikaḷ;
             vēḻamke ṭātairuḷ ām;
       vañciyar peruñcēṉai; kaitaiuṭai vāḷ; neṭiya
       vaṇmaipeṟu kaṭalmu racamām;
       makarampa tākai;varu kōkilam kākaḷam;
       maṉatēpe rumpōrk kaḷam;
       cañcarika icaipāṭal; kumutanē yaṉkavikai;
       cārirati yēma ṉaiviām;
       taṟukaṇmaṭa mātariḷa mulaimakuṭam ām;alkul
       tavaṟāti rukkum iṭamām;
       añcukaṇai māravēṭ keṉpar; eḷiyōrkkelām
       amutamē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
       aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       92. pakai koḷḷat takātavar
       maṉṉavar, amaiccar, turccaṉar, kōḷar, tūtaroṭu
             māṟāta marmam uṭaiyōr,
       valuvar, karu ṇīkar, miku pākamcey taṉṉam iṭum
             maṭaiyar,man tiravā tiyar,
       coṉṉam uṭaiyōr pulaiyar, upatēca matuceyvōr
             cūḻvayit tiyar,ka vitaikaḷ
       coṟṟiṭum pulavar ivar patiṉaintu pēroṭum
             coppaṉan taṉil ākilum
       naṉṉeṟi aṟintapēr pakaiceyti ṭārkaḷ in
             nāṉilat teṉpar kaṇṭāy!
       nāriyōr pākaṉē! vētāka mamparavum
             nampaṉē! aṉpar niti yē!
       aṉṉamūr piramaṉum kaṇṇaṉum kāṇāta
             aṇṇalē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       93. naṉmai tīmai pakuttup payaṉ koḷḷutal
       cuvaicēr karumpaiveṇ pālaip paruttiyaic
             collumnal nellai eḷḷait
       tūyateṅ kiṉkaṉiyai eṇṇāta tuṭṭarait
             toṇṭarait toḻuto ḻumpai
       navaitīru māṟukaṇ ṭittē payaṉkoḷvar
             naṟṟamiḻk kavivā ṇarai
       nalamikka ceḻumalarai ōviya meṉattakka
             nayamuḷḷa nāriyar tamaip
       puvimītil upakāra neñcaraic ciṟuvaraip
             pōrvīra raittū yaraip
       pōtavum parivō ṭitañceyya mikupayaṉ
             pukaḻpeṟak koḷvar kaṇṭāy
       avamati tavirt teṉṉai āṭkoṇṭa vaḷḷalē!
             aṇṇalē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       94. muppattiraṇṭu aṟaṅkaḷ
       peṟumil, peṟuvittaloṭu, kātōlai, nāḷtoṟum
             piḷḷaikaḷ arunti ṭumpāl,
       pēcariya cattiram, maṭam,ā vuriñcukal
             peṇpōkam, nāvitaṉ, vaṇāṉ,
       maṟaimoḻika ṇāṭi, taṇṇīr, talaik keṇṇeypacu
             vāyiṉuṟai, piṇama ṭakkal,
       vāvi, iṟum uyirmīṭṭal, tiṉporuḷ, aṭaikkāy
             vaḻaṅkal, cuṇ ṇāmpu tavutal,
       ciṟaiyuṟu pavarkkamutu, vēṟṟilam kāttal, poḻil
             ceytal, muṉ ṉūliṉ maṉam,
       tikaḻvilaṅ kūṇ, piccai, aṟucamaya rukkuṇṭi,
             tēvarā lāyam,a vuṭatam;
       aṟaitalkaṟ pōrkkaṉṉam nāleṭ ṭaṟaṅkaḷummuṉ
             aṉṉaiceyal; arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē.
       95. illaṟam
       tantaitāy caṟkuruvai iṭṭatey vaṅkaḷaic
             caṉmārkkam uḷamaṉai viyait
       tavaṟāta cuṟṟattai ēvāta makkaḷait
             taṉainampi varuvōr kaḷaic
       cintaimakiḻ veytavē paṇiviṭaicey vōrkaḷait
             teṉpulat tōr vaṟiñarait
       tītilā atitiyaip parivuṭaiya tuṇaivarait
             tēṉuvaip pūcurar tamaic
       cantatam ceykaṭaṉai yeṉṟumivai piḻaiyātu
             tāṉpurin tiṭalil laṟam;
       cārunalam uṭaiyarām tuṟavaṟat tōrumivar
             tammuṭaṉ cariyā yiṭār!
       antari uyirkkelān tāytaṉiṉum nallavaṭ
             kaṉpaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       96. purāṇam
       talaimaicēr pauṭikam, iliṅkam, mārkkaṇṭam, eḻil
             cārumvā maṉam, mac camē,
       caivam, pe ruṅkūrmam, varuvarā kam, kanta
             caritamē, piramāṇ ṭamum,
       talaimaicēr ippattum uyarciva purāṇamām;
             neṭiyamāl katai;vai ṇavam
       nīticēr kāruṭam, nāratam, pākavatam,
             nīṭiya purāṇam nāṉkām;
       kalaivaḷarcol patumamoṭu, kiramakai varttamē,
             kamalā layaṉkā taiām;
       katiravaṉ kātaiyē cūriya purāṇamām;
             kaṉal kātai ākki ṉēyam;
       alaikoṇṭa natiyumveṇ matiyumaṟu kumpuṉaiyum
             attaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       97. pukaḻcci
       parukāta amutoruvar paṇṇāta pūṭaṇam,
             pārilmaṟai yāta nitiyam,
       paritikaṇ ṭalarāta nilavukaṇ ṭularāta
             paṇpuṭaiya paṅkē rukam
       karukāta puyal, kalaikaḷ arukāta tiṅkaḷ, veṅ
             kāṉil uṟai yāta cīyam;
       karutariya ikkuṇam aṉaittumuṇ ṭāṉapēr
             kāciṉiyil arumai yākum!
       teriyavurai ceyyiṉmoḻi, kīrtti, varu kalviyoṭu,
             cīritayam, īkai, vataṉam,
       tiṭamāṉa vīram, ivai yeṉṟaṟiku vārkaḷ! ic
             cekamelām koṇṭā ṭavē
       aruḷ kaṟpa tarueṉṉa ōṅkiṭum tāṉa turai
             ākumema tarumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       98. tirumāl avatāram
       cōmukā curaṉai muṉ vataittamarar tuyarkeṭac
             curutitan tatumac camām;
       curartamak kamutuīnta tāmaiyām; pāypōṟ
             curuṭṭimā nilame ṭuttē
       pōmiraṇi yākkataṉai uyiruṇṭa tēṉamām;
             pollāta kaṉakaṉ uyiraip
       pōkkiyatu naraciṅkam; ulakaḷan tōṅkiyatu
             puṉitavā maṉamūrt tiām;
       ēmuṟum irāvaṇaṉai veṉṟavaṉ irākavaṉ;
             iravikulam vēra ṟuttōṉ
       ērpara cirāmaṉ; varu kaṇṇaṉoṭu palarāmaṉ
             ippuvi payanta virttōr
       āmiṉiya kaṟkiiṉi mēlvaruva tivaipattum
             arivaṭivam; arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       99. civamūrtti
       piṟaicūṭi, umainēcaṉ, viṭaiyūrti, naṭamiṭum
             periyaṉ, uyar vatuvai vaṭivaṉ
       pic cāṭaṉaṉ,kāma takaṉaṉ,maṟa liyaiveṉṟa
             pemmāṉ, puran takittōṉ,
       maṟamali calantaraṉai māyttavaṉ, piramaṉmuṭi
             vauviṉōṉ, vīrē curaṉ,
       maruvunara ciṅkattai veṉṟaaraṉ, umaipākaṉ
             vaṉacaraṉ,kaṅkā ḷaṉē,
       viṟalmēvu caṇṭēca raṭcakaṉ, kaṭumānti
             mikkacak karamutavi ṉōṉ,
       vināyakaṟ karuḷceytōṉ kukaṉumai yuṭaṉkūṭi
             miḷirēka pātaṉ, cukaṉ,
       aṟivariya taṭciṇā mūrttiyo ṭiliṅkamām
             aiyaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       100. kavi vaṇakkam
       malaritaḻi paiṅkuvaḷai meṉmullai mallikai
             marukkoḻun tuyarkū viḷam
       maṟṟumuḷa vācamalar pattiram cilarcūṭa
             maṇimuṭi taṉiṟpo ṟuttē
       cilareruk koṭuvaṉat tuṭpūḷai paccaṟuku
             cemmuḷḷi malarcū ṭavē
       cittamvait tavaiyumaṅ kīkarit tiṭumakā
             tēvatē vā!te rintē
       kalaivalā ruraikkunaṉ kaviyoṭam palavāṇa
             kavirāyaṉ āku meṉpuṉ
       kaviyaiyum cūṭiyē maṉamakiḻn tiṭuvatuṉ
             kaṭaṉ ākum aṭalnā kamum
       alaiperuku kaṅkaiyum ceḻumatiya mumpuṉaiyum
             amalaṉē! arumai matavēḷ
       aṉutiṉamum maṉatilniṉai tarucatura kirivaḷar
             aṟappaḷī curatē vaṉē!
       ————

References

   1. http://www.projectmadurai.org/
