                                 [pmdr0.gif]
                     ___________________________________

                tiruvaḷḷuvar āyvukkāṉa ōr aṟimukam
                         āṅkilattil coṟpoḻivu
                         auvai turaicāmi piḷḷai

                An Introduction to the Study of Tiruvalluvar
                A lecture by Prof. Avvai S. Duraiswamy Pillai
         In bilingual (English-Tamil) scripts, unicode/utf-8 format
                     ___________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   Acknowledgements:
       Our Sincere thanks go to the Tamil Virtual Academy for providing a
       scanned PDF of this work.
       The e-text has been generated using Google OCR and subsequent
       editing and proof-reading.
       Preparation of HTML and PDF versions: Dr. K. Kalyanasundaram,
       Lausanne, Switzerland.
       © Project Madurai, 1998-2019.
       Project Madurai is an open, voluntary, worldwide initiative devoted
       to preparation
       of electronic texts of tamil literary works and to distribute them
       free on the Internet.
       Details of Project Madurai are available at the website
       [1]https://www.projectmadurai.org/
       You are welcome to freely distribute this file, provided this
       header page is kept intact.
     __________________________________________________________________

                An Introduction to the Study of Tiruvalluvar
                A lecture by Prof. Avvai S. Duraiswamy Pillai

   Source:
       AN INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF TIRUVALLUVAR
       A lecture by Prof. Avvai S. Duraiswamy Pillai
       with a Foreword by T. Sundaram Chettiar, B. Com.,
       DT. GOVERNOR,304, SOUTH, LIONS INTERNATIONAL, MADURAI.
       VISALAKSHI PATHIPAGAM,
       "MEENAKSHI NILAYAM" Tirupparankundram Road, MADURAI -3.
       Printed at VISALAKSHI ACHAKAM, Madurai-'61.
       Price: Rs. 1-50
       --------------
       FOREWORD T. Sundaram Chettiar, B. Com.,
       District Governer, Lions International Dist. 304 (South) Madurai.
       It will not be an exaggeration if we say that of all the great
       poets, philosophers and thinkers of the ancient as well as modern
       times, Thiruvalluvar stands foremost. But it is a matter for regret
       that his immortal work, Thirukkural, perhaps the greatest and
       noblest literary creation the human intellect has ever produced, is
       not so much known to the outside world as those of Homer or Virgil,
       Plato or Aristotle, Dante or Goethe and Shakespeare or Milton.
       Even in India, beyond the boundaries of Tamil Nad, the knowledge
       and study of Thiruk kural is deplorably meagre and though it far
       exceeds in its grand and noble conception of the philosophy of
       life, both material and spiritual, and in its scientific treatment
       of the four branches, viz., Aram, Porul, Inbham and Veedu, it has
       not become as much popular as Ghita or Upanishads. The reason for
       this sorry state of affairs is not far to seek. Despite the fact
       that Thirukkural, according to one of its titles - Podhumarai - is
       common to all nations, all religions and acceptable for all times,
       it still remains a sealed book and a forbidden fruit to many of the
       Indians and to the foreigners. We have to blame ourselves for this,
       because, while people of other countries, why even our brethren
       like Bengalis, are propagating their language and literature
       throughout the world, we are vainly indulging in our glorious past.
       Yet it it is gratifying to note that attempts are now being made by
       Tamii scholars, educational and other cultural bodies to spread the
       knowledge of Thirukkural among the peoples of the world and it is
       being translated in different languages by competent authors. I am
       particularly glad that one of such attempts by my esteemed and
       learned friend Professor Avvai S. Doraiswami Pillai has resulted in
       the form of a paper entitled as "An Introduction To The Study of
       Thiru valluvar", which he has been now brought out in a book form
       with a view to help the non-Tamils to have access to the greatest,
       most valuable and inexhaustible treasure - Thirukkural. While con
       gratulating Professor Avvai S. Doraiswami Pillai on his
       achievement, I wish that he and other Scholars of Tamil should
       offer many more such treatises to non-Tamils especially to
       Europeans and Americans.
       T. SUNDARAM.
       ---------------

                AN INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF THIRUVALLUVAR

       Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen,
       I have great pleasure in expressing at the outset my grateful
       thanks for the kind opportunity, you, the Lions of Madurai, have
       given me to address you on Thiruvalluvar. This opportunity is
       noteworthy for the reason that our Union Government has recognised
       the greatness of Thiruvalluvar and has issued Postal Stamps with
       his image.
       The present trend of thinking among the educated is quite different
       from that of those in my younger days; the outlook of our young men
       now is broad and international. It looks upon man as man; his
       colour, caste and creed are ignored. The uplift of man, as Tolstoy
       puts it, lies in the endeavour to raise the super element of human
       aspect and curb and control the animal man" in him.
       It is therefore proper and legitimate that the Lions club of
       Madurai takes up for its study Thiruvalluvar whose object and aim
       of study centre in and around the human society. Valluvar, you
       know, lived in Madurai when the Egyptian and Athenian civilizations
       were at zenith. Great thinkers and philosophers like Plato,
       Aristotle and a host of others were shining bright and influencing
       the human society to a greater extent.
       Ancient Grecian writers inform us of the import of Tugi (tōkai -
       pīli) from Indies; Thiruvalluvar also points out the export of the
       same Tugi in one of his couplets,

   1. pīlipey cākāṭum acciṟum appaṇṭam
       cāla mikuttup peyiṉ.

   Our Bharat was not wanting in thinkers like Thirualluvar in those days.
   There were Bodhayana, Apasthamba, Asvalayana, Koutilya and Parasara,
   besides Manu, the law giver. But the mind of these thinkers was so
   saturated with communal feelings called Varnashrama Dharma that they
   could not extricate themseves from bias. They thought and did
   everything in terms of caste and community. Even the author of the
   famous Bhagavat Gita, who devotes a separate chapter to the castes and
   the respective communal duties and Birthru Hari, the author of Neethi
   Sathagam, are not free from this mental distemper.
   That is why Prof. Sundaram Pillai went to the extent of saying,
   2 vaḷḷuvar cey tirukkuṟaḷai maṟuvaṟa naṉku uṇarntōrkaḷ
       uḷḷuvarō maṉuvāti orukulattukku orunīti

   i.e., if anybody studies Thirukkural in detail he will never like the
   code of Manu and Smirities which mete out justice on the basis of caste
   and community.
   From these we can see that Thiruvalluvar is the only great thinker
   superior to those law givers and moralists mentioned before and his
   views are in tune with the modern sociological trends which tend to a
   formation of a casteless and classless community, free from all types
   of distinctions by virtue of birth or practice. Sublimation of life by
   following the natural rules of conduct is the sole aim of Tirukkural
   and it does not place any religious or political faith or thought, as
   the be-all and the end-all of life. It is in pursuance of this aim that
   Valluvar takes the whole human society into consideration and wants to
   establish it on the bed-rock of moral virtue. The unit of society
   according to him consists of husband and wife. If the man and woman of
   a family - unit are well qualified to lead a virtuous life, the whole
   human society, on the other hand, will make an ideal society enjoying
   permanent peace and pleasure.
   In the introductory chapters of Tirukkural, human society is viewed
   both materially and morally. In the first chapter, Thiruvalluvar
   explains the importance of prayer to God as the only solution for the
   cares and anxieties, pangs of birth and deaths, the ambitious longing
   for wealth and pleasure and the last, if not the least, the innate
   ignorance which is responsible for all the deeds, good or bad.
   The drama of human life is to be enacted on the face of the earth. The
   material aspect of life rests upon the food-stuff, which is the
   immediate product of the rain; but just like the grace of God, rain is
   also beyond the control of man.
   The existence of worldly life is dependent upon the rain; it is the
   only thing responsible to ensure living for all beings. Thiruvalluvar
   has thought very minutely of the importance of the rain and declares
   that even though the earth is surrounded by expansive seas and oceans,
   it will be as useless as the poet says, "water water eveywhere, not a
   drop to drink.” Modern science can provide us with distilled water when
   our water cans go dry in the midst of the sea, but this artificial
   distilled water is tasteless and hence incapable of quenching our
   thirst; that is why Thiruvalluvar says that even the watery oceans will
   shrink in their importance, if there is no rain at all.
   3 neṭuṅkaṭalum taṉṉīrmai kuṉṟum taṭintu eḻili
       tāṉ nalkā tākiviṭiṉ

   Man maintains his power of elevating his human spirit to super human
   and divine level simply because his physical activities are crowned
   with pleasure and plenty on account of the rain. Consequently, penance
   and patience help him to raise his spiritual existence up and above
   ordinary human level.
   4 tāṉam tavam iraṇṭum taṅkā viyaṉulakam
       vāṉam vaḻaṅkā teṉiṉ.

   Even when the human society, by the grace of Lord God and the heavenly
   rain, is provided with peace and plenty, its worldly social life has to
   be governed by the most experienced and wise men of keen intellect and
   broad spiritual outlook. They are gifted with keen insight so that with
   the philosophic process of analysis and synthesis they are able to
   analyse the universe into five and more elements mentally and
   apperceive psychologically the inner working of each element. This is
   put in a nutshell as
   5 cuvai yoḷi ūṟuōcai nāṟṟam eṉṟaintiṉ
       vakaiterivāṉ kaṇṇatē ulaku.

   Having lived their life most profitably both for others and for
   themselves, they take to asectic life and devote their time to give
   pieces of advice to the experienced and to guide the inexperienced.
   The ascetic life they had adopted gives ample opportunities for
   introspection and self - negation and ripens their mind to render all
   possible help to their fellow beings. That is why their actions are
   considered to be the greatest which no other human being can do. This
   our Valluvar says:
   6 ceyaṟkariya ceyvār periyar ciṟiyar
       ceyaṟkariya ceyka lātār..

   They are embodiments of love and sympathy. They are called antaṇar
   (Andhanar) because their love is towards the welfare of all living
   beings. As such, they become the accredited leaders of the human
   society. Every word they utter is held as law for human conduct. Their
   words and ideas of virtues, morals, laws and regulations are
   incorporated in this work Kural.
   In the last chapter of the Introductory part Thiruvalluvar gives the
   general scope of the aṟam (Aram) which he wants to present to us in the
   following chapters.
   Aram in Tamil is a very comprehensive term and it includes all virtues,
   morals, laws both individual and social and regulations of conduct both
   in the private and public sector. The first and foremost object of any
   individual is to attain glory and obtain wealth. He desires that his
   life graph must always be straight and on the positive side i.e. plus
   side, and so Thiruvalluvar says to him that this is possible and
   attainable if Aram is adhered to strictly and followed most faithfully.
   Man's actions, good or bad, are first conceived in the mind and then
   put into action. Aram can be worth doing only when it is conceived in
   the mind which is pure. Therefore the first requisite he enjoins on us
   is to be pure in mind.
   7 maṉattukkaṇ mācu ilaṉātal aṉaittu aṟaṉ
       ākula nīra piṟa.

   In putting this Aram into action one must be careful in eschewing
   uncharitable envy, illegitimate desire, unscrupulous anger and
   mischievous offensive speech. The purpose of man's life on earth is to
   attain pleasure; no power or pelf is capable of bringing lasting peace
   and pleasure; history tells us in its true veracity, that sceptre and
   crown have tumbled down and rich diadems have been thrown away rejected
   on the ground that they were incapable of yielding happiness with
   peace. Man's burning desire is to attain unalloyed, untroubled and
   everlasting pleasure and peace. Even this is not impossible provided
   you are an ardent devotee of Aram; Aram is the only source of that
   everlasting pleasure and nothing else.
   8 aṟattāṉ varuvatē iṉpam maṟṟu ellām
       puṟatta pukaḻum ila.

   ------------------
   PART I
   Gentlemen,
   Having introduced Aram in this way, Thiruvalluvar begins to enlarge his
   subject of Aram and exhorts the human society to follow it.
   In the beginning, he begins with the household life, because, according
   to Valluvar and his predecessors as we have already seen, family is the
   unit of the human society. But our modern politicians advocate
   individuals as the unit of the society and they base all the
   Governmental activities taking the individual, male or female, as the
   unit. According to our traditions and culture, family-unit is
   indissoluble and sacred. Splitting family into individuals has
   torpedoed peace and tranquillity at home. This reduces the house to a
   temporary lodging for the male and the female individuals. There is
   another school of thought professing the village community as the unit
   of the human society. Here, the unit is heterogeneous in its structure
   and the active are absent on account of their exodus to urban areas.
   Thus we can see how realistic our Valluvar is and true to our culture;
   he gives a lead to the entire human community.
   The domestic life of each family or the unit of the human society is
   replete with duties and services to be rendered to the community at
   large. Human life on earth is always interdependent; physical,
   economical, social and intellectual inter-dependence is the summum
   bonus of life. With this in his view, Valluvar says that every
   house-holder must be of help, assistance, and guidance to his fellowmen
   besides being a mainstay of the ascetics, poor and needy, and those who
   are too old and feeble to shift for themselves. Ancestral worship,
   devotion to duty, hospitality to the guests and timely help to
   relatives are the general duties imposed upon each householder. In
   discharging these duties, the male and female of the family-unit must
   on no account forget to preserve their person by attending to its needs
   and comforts.
   It is the human body which is the most indispensable instrument of
   carrying out the various Arams, the essence of existence. The wife of
   the house holder is called the life-partner and she occupies the
   supreme position of the family in its internal affairs. In the days of
   Valluvar their union was not separable by any law or regulation. No
   government had the right to cut asunder their partnership in life. The
   government of the family was entirely in the hands of the wife and her
   family budget never ran into deficit. She was the home and finance
   minister to the government of the family.
   Every duty of the family is discharged in consistence with the dignity
   of the house. And the domestic expenditure is in proportion to its
   income. The name and fame of the family rests entirely in the virtuous
   conduct of the wife. Among the most glorious things on earth, nothing
   is superior to a woman who upholds her chastity with firmness of mind.
   9 peṇṇiṟ peruntakka yāvuḷa kaṟpeṉṉum
       tiṇmai yuṇṭākap peṟiṉ.

   To her, the loving husband is the Lord God. Bowing low at his feet she
   controls the entire elements of nature, and commands them to execute
   her wish. Valluvar says that rains will pour down if she desires. She
   is vigilant in guarding herself and her chastity, always attentive to
   her husband's comfort, ever anxious to safeguard the tradition and
   dignity of the family and unfailing in the discharge of her domestic
   duties. It is her sincere conviction that if her husband, her life
   partner, attains everlasting glory and bliss, she will, in turn,
   without any doubt, be deified in the world where gods live.
   10 peṟṟāṉ peṟiṟ peṟuvar peṇṭir peruñciṟappup
       puttēḷir vāḻum ulaku.

   She therefore directs her thought, word and deed towards raising the
   right reputation of her husband in the paths of domestic virtue.
   Any lacking in this aspect of her life will not only drive the whole
   family to docks but her poor husband will lose his manly appearance,
   lion-like walk, before his scorning foes.
   11 pukaḻpurinta illilōrkku illai ikaḻvārmuṉ
       ēṟupōl pīṭu naṭai.

   From these we come to the conclusion that a virtuous wife is a real
   blessing to a house. But this is not sufficient. She must bring forth
   brilliant children. They are fine ornaments to the household. She is
   not only responsible for the prevalence of peace and pleasure but
   should beautify the household life by bringing up good children. It
   must be clearly understood that procreating children is not the sole
   purpose of the family life; according to Valluvar, Tholkappiar and
   other ancient Tamil saints, the children were true ornaments as well as
   wealth to the family and to that effect they were brought up.
   Of all the valuable acquisitions a husband and wife of a family can
   have, nothing is greater than begetting intelligent children. Sons and
   daughters of irreproachable character will enable their parents to
   enjoy all pleasure not only in this life but in the seven-fold births
   they may take in future and that is because great thinkers of the past
   declared one's children as one's fortune. The wishes and the best thing
   that a father can do to his children is to educate them to such an
   extent as would elevate them to the forefront of the councils of the
   wise.
   The parents feel that, by the education they give, if their sons and
   daughters possess for higher degree of knowledge than themselves, it
   would do immense good to all beings at large. When the society
   recognises the greatness of her son and offers him the foremost of its
   place, the mother's heart is filled with pride and happiness
   exceedingly greater than what she enjoyed when she gave birth to him.
   Having shown the true extent of the parental care and love towards the
   intellectual growth of the son, Valluvar exhorts the son that the best
   requital that a grateful son could offer to his father is to make the
   wise men praise the parent for presenting so noble and virtuous a son
   for the benefit of the human society. With this chapter Valluvar
   completes the structure of the unit of the human society.
   These family-units are bound together by the sacred bond of genuine
   love; this love is spontaneous and nothing can obstruct it from its
   flow. From love springs affection to all and that in turn results in
   real friendship with others.
   12 aṉpu īṉum ārvamuṭaimai atu īṉum
       naṇpu eṉṉum nāṭāc ciṟappu.

   This genuine, spontaneous flow of love not only encourages virtue but
   is of utmost importance to avoid and remove evil from the minds of the
   wicked and cruel. The very existence of the living beings is due to
   this love; but for this love, the whole universe will be devoid of
   entire beings and it will be full of skin-clad bones. We thus
   understand that love is nothing but a binding force pulling all the
   members together to form a solid human entity called family. This love
   bound family comes in contact with the other units and by mutual love,
   these units of the human society are linked and knit together. Thus the
   life of the human beings becomes the movement of love, affection and
   friendship.
   In 17 chapters, Valluvar deals with the positive and negative
   characteristics of the working of the family units along with the whole
   human society. Instead of entering into the details, let me confine
   myself to the presentation of the general scope for your thought at
   present.
   Reception and cordial entertainment of guests and other fellowmen,
   utterance of kind and sincerely sweet words, gratefulness to people who
   are of help, assistance and guidance and sense of uprightness and
   equity in transactions are the main positive elements for success in
   family life. Of course, experience of our life on earth tells us that
   the course is not smooth. There are some negative forces arising out of
   our movement in the society at large. Failure to control our mind and
   speech, covetousness, lack of forbearance and fortitude, evil tendency
   of enjoying others' possessions and back-biting, indulgence in
   frivolous and vain talks are the most important negative
   characteristics which impede the pursuit of the house-holder to achieve
   his object. In order to overcome these anti-social negative elements,
   Valluvar points out the importance of the generosity of mind,
   liberality of help to others without any thought of recompense, feeding
   the hungry and helping the poor and needy.
   The ultimate fruit of a life devoted to the various duties already
   enunciated is earthly name and fair renown; otherwise life is not worth
   living. As regards the reception of people, Valluvar says that the love
   that has hitherto been confined within the family - husband, wife and
   child - begins to manifest itself when a guest arrives to the family.
   No matter whether the guest is a stranger or not, he is received with
   courtesy and affection. The householder thinks that the sole object of
   running a family is to receive and serve others whether they are
   already known or otherwise.
   13 iruntu ōmpi ilvāḻva tellām viruntōmpi
       vēḷāṇmai ceytaṟ poruṭṭu

   In order to achieve this object every individual must speak sweet and
   kind words. Only such words are declared sweet which come out from
   righteous persons with heart full of love and speech completely
   guileless.
   14 iṉcolāl īram aḷaiip paṭiṟu ilavām
       cemporuḷ kaṇṭār vāyccol

   Speaking always kind and pleasant words born of humility, not only
   serves as an ornament but protects one from falling a prey to indigence
   which produces misery.
   15 tuṉpuṟūum tuvvāmai illākum yārmāṭṭum
       iṉpuṟūum iṉcolavarkku

   It helps every man to maintain friendly relation with all. The next
   allied Aram that brings an individual into the fold of the society is
   his gratefulness to the help and assistance he receives from others. As
   every human being is inter-dependent, helping and being helped by
   others are not infrequent. Some of the helps received might have been
   done without any expectation of return, some may be in times of need
   and some might have been without any thought of its high value. Even
   when the help done is as small as millet's seed, wise men who realise
   the fruits of the act, will only think of the benefit derived by such
   help and be grateful. The true value of the help received does not lie
   in its quantity; but it depends entirely upon the worth and quality of
   the person who receives it.
   16 utavi varaittaṉṟu utavi utavi
       ceyappaṭṭār cālpiṉ varaittu.

   The quality of being grateful is quite essential for the proper working
   of the human society; it helps us to wipe out from our memory any wrong
   done to us however deadly it may be.
   17 koṉṟaṉṉa iṉṉā ceyiṉum avar ceyta
       oṉṟu naṉṟu uḷḷak keṭum.

   The next factor that makes an individual indispensable to the society
   is the sense of uprightness or equity. Man is apt to be biased on
   account of various interests in the midst of which he lives and moves.
   Sense of equity and uprightness must be above all kinds of bias and
   partiality.
   Opportunities to swerve from uprightness are greater in earning wealth
   as the comforts of worldly life depend more upon it and neglect of
   equity and justice also becomes necessary in protecting the ill-gotten
   wealth. Therefore, Valluvar averses that wealth acquired by proper and
   fair means never dwindles away but passes safely to the posterity.
   18 ceppam uṭaiyavaṉ ākkam citaiviṉṟi
       eccattiṟku ēmāp puṭaittu.

   If a slight deviation from justice were to fetch you the most maximum
   amount of wealth and power, Valluvar strongly condemns it saying that
   it must be rejected with contemptuous disregard instantaneously.
   19 naṉṟē tariṉum naṭuvikantu ām ākkattai
       aṉṟē oḻiya viṭal.

   i.e. Give up all wealth however good and pleasant it may be, if it is
   acquired by dubious means. Trade and Commerce will flourish only when
   people engaged in it are upright in their dealings. Unjust and unfair
   transactions in trade will result in the fall of the society in the
   estimation of other peoples of the world.
   20 vāṇikam ceyvārkku vāṇikam pēṇip
       piṟavum tamapōl ceyiṉ.

   Supposing a businessman or a judge in a court of law entertains a
   thought which fails to equipoise his mind, then he must take it for
   granted, that it is a sure sign of disaster and destruction waiting to
   befall himself and the nation he belongs to.
   21 keṭuvalyāṉ eṉpatu aṟika taṉ neñcam
       naṭuvorīi alla ceyiṉ.

   In the routine of our life, especially when we come in contact with men
   and matters highly beneficial, there is every likelihood for our mind
   to go beyond our control, and our words more excessive. Self-restraint
   or control is the only weapon to guard us from consequential downfall.
   22 kākka poruḷā aṭakkattai ākkam
       ataṉiṉ ūuṅkillai uyirkku.

   Of course, self control is excellent in all, but it most befits those
   whom fortune smiles upon. If the mind sometimes break the control, it
   will begin to roam about in thought and its harm will not be so serious
   as the unrestrained word; when it loses its control over the tongue,
   words become harsh and hot and cause grievous wounds to others.
   Thiruvalluvar says:
   23 tīyiṉāl cuṭṭapuṇ uḷḷāṟum māṟātē
       nāviṉāl cuṭṭa vaṭu.

   i. e. 'The wound may heal though from a burning brand, And be
   forgotten; but the wound never heals a burning tongue inflicts.'
   (Ellis). Even though a person may be unrestrained in all else, he must
   have effective control over his tongue; otherwise he will be degraded
   by licentious speech and put to trouble by his indiscreet words.
   Control of mind and restraint over tongue of an individual contribute a
   good deal to the well being of the human society.
   Then comes the conduct and discipline of each householder. He must
   conform to the general discipline and decency the society requires. He
   cannot isolate himself from the social structure and its laws. If he
   fails to understand, in spite of all his extensive learning, that he is
   a part and parcel of the society and that, as is the society so he must
   move, he will be looked down upon as one devoid of any refined culture.
   This conformity to social requirements is called oḻukkam (Olukkam) in
   Tamil by Valluvar. Adherence to Olukkam raises one to the exalted place
   in life and therefore it must be protected well and prized above one's
   life.
   24 oḻukkam viḻuppam taralāl oḻukkam
       uyiriṉum ōmpap paṭum.

   Proper observance of the social conduct will be considered good, and
   will be crowned with peace plenty and pleasure; if wrong course is
   adopted the person will be undone forever.
   25 oḻukkam uṭaimai kuṭimai iḻukkam
       iḻinta piṟappāy viṭum.

   The best mark of a person having Olukkam (oḻukkam) is that he will
   never utter evil words even in the moment of forgetfulness.
   26 oḻukka muṭaiyavarkku ollāvē tīya
       vaḻukkiyum vāyāl colal.

   In moving about in the human society, the householder has ample
   opportunities to come across men and women belonging to other families.
   Man's attention is arrested, and desire kindled, when beauty confronts
   him. The observing mind may be influenced and try to covet the thing of
   beauty; if it is the person of a female, the degree of its pull may be
   great. Here, you see that the success of the householder lies in
   controlling his mind. If the householder is really a wise man, he will
   at once overrule his mind that the particular woman is the sole
   property of another individual over whom he has no claim. No Dharma
   Sastra or Artha Sastra pronounces any such claim. Even if the husband
   of the particular lady is such a close friend that he will never
   suspect if anything untoward takes place, the fellow who commits the
   outrage will be counted as living dead. Close friendship, high and
   influential position in life, economic and physical strength - these
   things intoxicate fools to trespass others' houses. According to
   Thiruvalluvar, any other sin committed by any individual may be
   tolerated but not adultery, as he condemns it as the mother of all
   sins.
   Another thing that upsets the mind of the disciplined householder is
   the insult inflicted by others. One can face any amount of praise; but
   it will be too unbearable for one to receive insults. Having been
   exasperated with undue insults, if a householder begins to retaliate,
   he loses his self-control and descends to the level of the person who
   insulted him either out of ignorance or foolishness. If a person wants
   to keep always his mind subservient to his will, he should guard his
   patience very zealously. If at all, any man resorts to retaliation, it
   will fetch him a satisfaction which will be momentary; but if he
   forgives the evildoer, all glory and honour will be then to him
   throughout the ages the world lives. Encouraged by the pride of immense
   wealth and exceeding valour, if the miscreant commits insult after
   insult, forbearance is the only weapon to conquer him decisively. Among
   the unpleasant words heard, those which cause insult are capable of
   destroying the peace of mind. Even ascetics of high order lose their
   control and punish the evildoers. If a house holder bears with patience
   the insolent words thrown at him, he will be far greater than those
   noble ascetics.
   27 uṇṇātu nōṟpār periyar piṟar collum
       iṉṉāc col nōṟpāriṉ piṉ.

   i.e. ascetics who fast and practise yoga are of course great; but any
   person who puts up with the insults is greater than those ascetics.
   Hence it will be found that forbearance is another factor which binds
   an individual with the society and is a source of mental tranquility.
   In the life of a householder, the wealth and high status of his
   neighbour or fellowman may kindle the fiery emotions of envy and bring
   ruins to his household. A well disciplined and virtuous house holder
   will therefore instead of envying others feel immensely pleased with
   the wealth of his fellowmen. He thinks that true virtue called Olukkam
   (oḻukkam) is to be free from envy and that oḻukkam in its turn gives
   Viluppam (viḻuppam ) i.e. the highest moral status in the society.
   28 oḻukkāṟāk koḷka oruvaṉ taṉ neñcattu
       aḻukkāṟu ilāta iyalpu
       29 viḻuppēṟṟiṉ aḵtu oppatu illai yārmāṭṭum
       aḻukkāṟṟiṉ aṉmai peṟiṉ.

   If, by mistake, any householder allows his mind to be usurped by the
   evil tendency of envying others, he will at once try to break the
   common law and covet wealth by iniquitous means. The blind covetousness
   will in turn drive him to complete destruction:
   30 iṟal īṉum eṇṇātu veḵkiṉ viṟal eṉum
       vēṇṭāmai eṉṉum cerukku

   A covetous mind instigates one to conspire against his neighbour and
   derive cruel pleasure at the fall caused by his envy. Some fall prey to
   this inhuman crime simply because they do not possess the particular
   object of their covetous desire. At times a highly educated individual,
   even when he is placed above wants, becomes illegally covetous and does
   great havoc to his neighbour.
   Another characteristic of certain anti-social elements is indecent
   back-biting, which is worse than covetousness. There is a section of
   people who have made it their profession to speak ill of others; this
   at times carries them to the extent of black-mailing. But it must be
   understood that this defect is not incorrigible. If the individual who
   engages himself in speaking ill of others in their absence, inquires
   into his own faults as he does unto others, he can free himself from
   this serious anti-social drawback.
   Just like back-biting, indulgence in frivolous and vain-talks destroys
   the relationship of the householder with the other members of the
   society. Even if he is good-natured and highly honoured on account of
   his station in life, the futility of his speech will reduce him to
   nothing and he will be neglected as good for nothing.
   In the discharge of the multifarious daily duties of a householder, he
   is apt to err and as such there is room for evil to creep in his
   thought, word and deed. So, every householder should always be careful
   to guard himself from doing evil to others. Poverty is one of the
   mischievous forces which may at times drive an individual to do evil
   which, instead of rescuing one from the pangs of penury, will throw him
   down headlong into its dark depths of misery.
   31 ilaṉ eṉṟu tīyavai ceyyaṟka ceyyiṉ
       ilaṉākum maṟṟum peyarttu.

   When once a person commits evil, there is no escape at all; it will
   pursue him till he meets the consequent destruction like his shadow
   which follows him wherever he goes.
   32 tīyavai ceytār keṭutal niḻal taṉṉai
       vīyātu aṭiyuṟain taṟṟu

   It must therefore be understood that if a man wants to lead a peaceful
   and pleasant life, he must never make himself an object of the
   onslaught of misfortunes caused by doing evil to others.
   In the ordinary life of a man heading a family, there may be occasions
   when he may unconsciously be driven to entertain evil thoughts and
   words. Realising the consequences, if he wants to control his mind, he
   must resort to helping the needy without expecting any return just as
   the heavenly clouds pour down rain without any thought of recompense.
   33 kaimmāṟu vēṇṭā kaṭappāṭu mārimāṭṭu
       eṉṉāṟṟuṅ kollō ulaku.

   Thus his mind expurgates the black thoughts of evil and ponders over
   the plight of others. He must think that the purpose of wealth acquired
   by hard toil and effort must be diverted to redress the grievances of
   those who live around him.
   34 tāḷāṟṟit tanta poruḷ ellām takkārkku
       vēḷāṇmai ceytaṟ poruṭṭu.

   By thus doing, the grateful recipients are brought closer and they
   serve as a strong army of virtuous protection from evil and sin. Help
   and assistance Tendered to those who deserve form themselves into a
   social virtue Oppuravu (oppuravu) in Tamil.
   Really rich people are those who are extraordinarily wise, whose heart
   is full of sympathy and who are generous in their outlook. Their riches
   are compared to a tank full of sweet water fit for drinking, a
   full-grown tree of sweet fruits standing in the heart of a free village
   and a medicinal tree each part of which is more efficacious in curing
   diseases. This oppuravu (Oppuravu), helping all deserving cases, may
   drain his resources but the house holder who is steadfast in exercising
   this Aram will rather be ready to succumb to the poverty caused by it.
   35 oppuraviṉāl varum kēṭu eṉiṉ aḵtu oruvaṉ
       viṟṟukkōḷ takka tuṭaittu.

   The mental bent towards helping deserving people gradually broadens in
   its outlook and stretches itself to those who are penniless; that is
   called Igai (īkai) in Tamil. Of course being begged by the poor and
   needy is painful; but it is less severe than feeding the hungry,
   because even the so called ascetics who conquer nature by penance bear
   the pangs of hunger. Feeding the hungry is strongly advocated by
   Valluvar; for he was not unaware of the fact that hunger kindles the
   ferocious animal spirit in man and instigates him to rise in revolt
   against the kings and the governments established by law. History tells
   us how kingdoms had been shattered to pieces by the hungry mob.
   If a single pie is lost, we take it seriously to our heart and feel
   very sorry; on the other hand if we give the same to a beggar, we are
   pleased with his smile. Smile is a contagion and if a beggar smiles on
   receipt of anything from you, you yourself begin to smile and that
   smile spreads miles and miles.
   On both occasions we part with our money, but yet there is pleasure in
   parting with it to a beggar. The man who hoards money parts with it
   when he dies with a heart too heavy. People of this type are
   numberless; Thiruvalluvar asks us, “Do they not experience the pleasure
   they could enjoy in helping the beggars with the money they now lose?"
   To a person, who has tasted the pleasure of helping the needy and the
   hungry, death will not be painful. The pain caused by inability to help
   the poor is experienced as worse than death.
   36 cātaliṉ iṉṉātatu illai iṉitu atūum
   ītal iyaiyāk kaṭai
   The ultimate fruit of a life devoted to all kinds of household duties
       hitherto enunciated is earthly name and fame and nothing else. This
       then is obtained by helping the poor and needy.
       After all man is mortal: neither the members of his family nor the
       society to which he has been attached accompany him, when he leaves
       once and for all the earth and its worldly life. The only thing
       that remains after him is his renown, Pugal (pukaḻ) The best
       qualification for a living individual is to achieve fame; otherwise
       his life becomes worthless. According to Valluvar, his disposable
       existence will spoil the fertility of the land where he lives.

   37 vacaiyilā vaṇpayaṉ kuṉṟum icaiyilā
       yākkai poṟutta nilam

   The people without glory or fame will simply condemn themselves for
   this drawback and in the end they will 'go down to the vile dust from
   whence they are sprung unwept, unhonoured and unsung'. The unblemished
   glorious man lives truly long after his death but the inglorious is
   dead even when he is alive.
   38 vacaiyoḻiya vāḻvārē vāḻvār icaiyoḻiya
       vāḻvārē vāḻā tavar.

   By the time a man attains glory and fame by proper conduct in family
   and society, he gets ripened in his worldly experience and entertains a
   kind of mental rejection of certain comforts he enjoyed in his youth.
   He feels that he has played his part in the drama of life, and that he
   should retire soon. As this thought takes root deeper in him, his
   feelings which were hitherto tethered to the family get loosened and
   spread towards all living beings. He looks upon the pain and pleasure
   of all beings as if they are all his own, becomes an embodiment of
   sympathy and compassion and begins to abstain from eating flesh and
   doing any harm to others. He realises the meat as the flesh of another
   being and every time he takes it, an animal is killed and deprived of
   its life. He realises that he has no right to remove a life from its
   body which is not made by him; the flesh of an animal is as precious to
   it as his to him. Thus he enters into the path of penance. Just as the
   craving for flesh-eating is controlled and irretrievably buried in the
   mind, so also he brooks all pains physical, mental or phenomenal and
   never does any harm to any being. The misfortunes that come to him
   successively are looked upon as fire that melts gold and makes it
   glitter brightly.
   39 cuṭaccuṭarum poṉ pōl oḷi viṭum tuṉpam
       cuṭaccuṭa nōṟkiṟpa varkku.

   In the time of Thiruvalluvar the retired householders took up ascetic
   life to spend the rest of their days in the service of the human
   society. Interpretation of laws regulating the earthly life, assistance
   and guidance to kings and leaders of various walks of life and divine
   wisdom were in their hands. People therefore respected them very highly
   and treated them as earthly gods. They felt that it was the duty of
   every householder to render whatever help they needed. Failure to
   harbour them most kindly and respectfully was considered to be a grave
   sin. Impropriety in conduct, stealth, robbery and other crimes should
   be out of their province, they should never utter falsehood because
   they lived for unsullied truth. Valluvar declared that among all the
   holy scriptures he studied he found no virtue greater than truth. Truth
   cleanses the mind just like water cleanses the body.
   40 puṟam tūymai nīrāl amaiyum akam tūymai
       vāymaiyāl kāṇappaṭum.

   At times naked truth causes harm to others and in such a case Valluvar
   permits untruth provided it does not cause in any way any trouble to
   anybody. As these wise ex-householders are exceedingly kind and
   compassionate they are not susceptible to anger. They know their anger
   is so effective that nothing on the face of the earth could defend
   itself from it. So the wrath of these gentlemen is always under
   restraint. Real control of anger is recognised only if and when vented
   it does harm.
   41 celliṭattuk kāppāṉ ciṉam kāppāṉ alliṭattuk
       kākkil eṉ kāvākkāl eṉ.

   This aggressive emotion called anger, before it finds vent, subdues the
   soft aspect of the human nature and suppresses the benevolent nature of
   one's intellect and thus reverts one to the brutal region of one's
   heart. It kills the feeling of joy and pleasure; it is a deadly enemy
   to the peace loving compassion of the soul.
   Physical weakness and nervous debility are the two main factors for the
   presence of short tempered anger among the retired old people, however
   learned and gentle they may be. Therefore, they readily resort to do
   evil in their provocation. As this will affect very seriously their
   pursuit of divine knowledge and freedom from the cycle of birth and
   death, they should guard themselves from inflicting suffering on
   others. It is a firm belief among those who are spotlessly pure in
   their heart that no evil on any account should be done to others. By
   doing evil to others they cannot obtain heavenly pleasure and glory. An
   individual may do any evil out of malice or a person may inflict injury
   out of sheer ignorance but no evil must be thought of against him. If
   the evil doer is to be punished, the best thing is to do him good in
   order that he may blush out of shame and disgrace.
   Next injunction issued is against killing other beings. All moral laws
   promulgate two essential duties; they are hospitality and creed of
   non-violence
   42 pakuttuṇṭu palluyir ōmputal nūlōr
       tokuttavaṟṟuḷ ellām talai.

   Killing of beings is a deliberate contravention of the fundamental law
   of virtue. Killing by any means animal or bird even for the defence of
   one's life must not be done.
   43 taṉṉuyir nīppiṉum ceyyaṟka tāṉpiṟitu
       iṉṉuyir nīkkum viṉai.

   Valluvar ridicules and rejects summarily the heavenly or divinely life,
   were it to be the prize of killing a living being.
   Abidance in these injunctions enables the retired family man or the
   recluse to observe the impermanency of the lives of the worldly beings.
   Wealth amassed disappears as freely and quickly as possible; as
   longevity of life is graduated into days and nights, passing of each
   day and night diminishes the span of life and in no moment it reaches
   the zero point. "Yesterday he was alive. Alas! To-day he is no more;
   Such is the greatness of the human world".
   44 nerunal uḷaṉ oruvaṉ iṉṟu illai eṉṉum
       perumai yuṭaittu ivvulaku.

   Death is just like falling asleep and again birth is waking up from
   sleep. Here a question is raised; when our body dies where does our
   soul which was residing in it go? Thiruvalluvar says "My dear man,
   don't think that there is no permanent habitation for the soul. There
   is one. Till it finds its permanent abode, it will be flying like a
   bird that goes away deserting its nest so beautifully built and
   protected".
   45 kuṭampai taṉittu oḻiyap puḷ paṟantaṟṟē
       uṭampōṭu uyiriṭai naṭpu.

   These observations give rise to subjective thinking and introspection
   takes him deep into his life. Life appears to be a store-house of
   misery; the more he renunciates the more free he feels from misery. A
   dislike towards birth and rebirth sets in and the ex-householder comes
   to the conclusion that his physical body is also redundant and a
   handicap against his attempt to gain relief from misery. He discovers
   the two fundamental factors of bondage that fetters his legs to march
   towards the land of no-birth and death. They are the so called "I" and
   "Mine". They are sometimes called the subjective ego and possessive
   ego. Severance of the connection of these two is the only solution for
   the problem of reaching the goal. To achieve this successfully “We are
   advised to cling to the Almighty who is by nature immune to these
   bonds," so that our endeavour for liberation will be crowned with
   success.
   46 paṟṟuka paṟṟaṟṟāṉ paṟṟiṉai appaṟṟaip
       paṟṟuka paṟṟu viṭaṟku.

   The pre-requisite for achieving liberation of our souls from these
   egocentric bondages is a clear knowledge of the sublime truth. This
   knowledge removes the innate ignorance covering the soul. Any doubt in
   our insight will land us in darkness and even the control of the five
   senses will not help us if we are not well enlightened by the supreme
   knowledge. By doing of ardent learning and subjective thinking, the
   acquisition of this knowledge is possible. Desire, anger and delusion
   caused by the self concentring egoism are the three obstacles on the
   way of our goal and if they are destroyed completely leaving no trace
   in the mind, success is sure and certain.
   We know fully well that the sphere of the activities of the human
   intellect is limited and consequently it is disabled to enjoy the
   pleasure stored up in the vast inexhaustible extensive Nature and even
   though the mind of the ascetic rests contented with this limited amount
   of pleasure and pain, the fiery desire caused by the previous
   experiences still flickers in and at times flares up and deflects his
   mind towards those pleasures. Valluvar realises its insatiable nature
   and sounds a note of warning that if the desire (avā) which is
   otherwise called the eternal seed of birth is left to survive, endless
   sorrows will be fall. He says:
   47 iṉpam iṭaiyaṟātu īṇṭum avā eṉṉum
       tuṉpattuḷ tuṉpam keṭiṉ.

   i.e. the desire called Ava in Tamil prompts man to do sin and if that
   dreadful desire which is responsible for all misery is rooted out,
   continuous flow of happiness is certain in our living present.
   Thiruvalluvar is a strong believer in the working of the cause and
   effect of every event of human lives; this is called ūḻviṉai by the
   ancient Tamils. ūḻ is effect and viṉai or action is cause. Many of our
   people have not understood the real purport of this phrase and have
   identified it with the theory of fatalism. Suppose a man undertakes to
   do a work, then when he commences the work or viṉai, its effect or
   payaṉ begins to grow simultaneously. By the time he finishes it, his
   viṉai becomes ripened and bears its fruit. The word ūḻttal means
   ripening; in this very sense this word is used by the learned scholars
   of the Sangam literature e g. ūḻmalar (akam. 199), ūḻmukai ( naṟ. 115),
   ūḻ kōṭu (puṟam. 322). Valluvar also uses it in the same sense, vide his
   couplet.
   48 iṇar ūḻttum nāṟā malar aṉaiyar tām kaṟṟatu
       uṇara viritturaiyā tār.

   When the work has been completed and the wage due to the work is paid,
   we say that the objective nature of the work done is its product
   ceyappaṭu poruḷ . The pleasure derived at the completion of the work is
   viṉaippayaṉ., e. the fruit of the viṉai. The pleasure the labourer
   enjoys on receipt of the wage is the fruit of his work or viṉai. Till
   the viṉaippayaṉ is enjoyed, it stands aloof waiting for the opportunity
   to afford enjoyment. In that state it is called ūḻviṉai or ūḻ. If the
   viṉaippayaṉ, the fruit of Karma, is pleasure, it is called ākūḻ, and if
   it is otherwise, it is pōkūḻ. When ākūḻ (Fortune) presents pleasure,
   our mind becomes clear and brisk in preparation to receive it in good
   spirits. If it is pōkūḻ, it preposes laziness and indifference in us.
   49 ākūḻāl tōṉṟum acaiviṉmai kaipporuḷ
       pōkūḻāl tōṉṟum maṭi.

   When our faculty of intellect thus gets dimmed and our mind deludes
   itself and produces folly, it should be understood that it foretells
   some misfortune. If on the other hand our mental state becomes
   different and its out-look and thought get broadened and bright, we can
   be sure of fortune waiting upon us. Valluvar therefore says,
   50 pētaip paṭukkum iḻavūḻ aṟivu akaṟṟum
       ākalūḻ uṟṟak kaṭai.

   The mysterious position this law of causation or ūḻ occupies is such
   that it reveals itself to us when we sincerely exhaust all our
   legitimate means to do a particular work, no matter whether it is
   thought, speech or deed. But Valluvar advises us not to be perturbed or
   discouraged when misfortune confronts us. We should understand that we
   are the real authors of our actions past or present and our eligibility
   and right to reap the fruit can never be averted or obstructed just
   like the falling of the ripened fruit cannot be prevented or postponed.
   Valluvar proclaims,
   51 ūḻiṉ peruvali yāvuḷa maṟṟoṉṟu
       cūḻiṉum tāṉ muntuṟum.

   And we must calmly receive and put up with it. Any attempt to divert or
   prevent it will be a sad failure.
   The law of causation called ūḻviṉai operates through any act of ours or
   any of our fellowmen connected directly or indirectly with us. Suppose
   a boy throws a stone at a dog, then it is the stone that hits it and
   causes pain; but the dog does not bark at the stone but frowns only at
   the boy. Similarly the pleasure or pain, profit or loss, come to us
   through some intermediaries, and we also should recognise that it is ūḻ
   that works behind and we are the real masters and not the
   intermediaries who simply act like the stone that hit the person of the
   dog.
   According to the Tamil philosophers, the law of causation is inanimate
   and insensible and it is directed towards us by the All Knowing
   Almighty Being who knows as to whom the profit or loss and pleasure or
   pain, are due. That is why Valluvar says that even this invincible law
   of causation can be averted and rendered powerless by earnest prayer
   and intensive devotion to God, the Almighty.
   52 iruḷcēr iruviṉaiyum cērā iṟaivaṉ
       poruḷcēr pukaḻpurintār māṭṭu.

   We should also note with care the difference between the Fatalist
   theory and the Tamilian ūḻviṉai. The Fatalist theory is based on the
   past Karma done in the previous births, and ūḻviṉai refers to all the
   karmas done in the past as well as in the present birth.
   --------------
   PART II
   Gentlemen,
   Next comes the second part entitled as poruṭpāl (Porutpal) which deals
   with the political, economic and social working of the human society,
   which ensures the proper attainment of earthly pleasure, which, in
   turn, leads human souls to the everlasting life of infinite pleasure,
   peace and plenty. No nationalism or racialism ever existed in the
   period of Thiruvalluvar and he therefore took the human society as a
   whole and its mundane life into consideration.
   We already saw in the first part that the family which is the unit of
   the society was headed by the husband and moved with the other units of
   the society as per the rules of conduct prescribed for the household
   life. In like manner the entire society has to be headed and led by an
   individual who is capable of looking after each and every unit of the
   Society. He was named as monarch or king and under his governance, the
   society was brought to function. So monarchy was the rule of the day of
   Thiruvalluvar. Here, Valluvar has dealt with in 70 chapters this aspect
   of human life i.e. the kingship and the government. The government is
   divided into six departments such as
   53 paṭai kuṭi kūḻ amaiccu naṭpu araṇ āṟum
       uṭaiyāṉ aracaruḷ ēṟu

   and let me condense them without leaving the essential and salient
   points as far as possible.
   The Government of the country was responsible to the King and not to
   the people and he was all in all in every walk of life. But personal
   qualifications for kingship were also prescribed and he was required to
   satisfy them. Acquisition of knowledge by learning from books and from
   learned scholars was not discriminatory but common to kings and their
   subjects. The king was trained both theoretically and practically to
   safeguard himself by preventing occurrence of faults in his royal
   conduct. He should not take decisions independently without consulting
   the experts. Administration of justice was in the hands of the king. It
   was the primary duty of the king to maintain law and order in the
   state. The council of ministers and the ministry of the state formed
   the head and heart of the Government. Though the king was the supreme
   head of the society, he must secure the hearty co-operation of the
   people.
   54 kuṭitaḻi ik kōlōccum mānila maṉṉaṉ
       aṭitaḻīi niṟkum ulaku

   It must be remembered in this connection that most of the powers of the
   monarch were so decentralised that villages enjoyed a kind of political
   autonomy. These villages were grouped as Nadu (nāṭu) on the basis of
   self-sufficiency.
   55 nāṭu eṉpa nāṭā vaḷattaṉa nāṭalla
       nāṭa vaḷam tarum nāṭu

   and the administration was carried on by assemblies of elders and
   learned men. Anyhow, in the days of Thiruvalluvar, Governments could
   not be stable and so every monarch was very keenly interested in the
   defence of the country by building and protecting forts and fortresses
   and strengthening the military service.
   National wealth of the country was freely allowed to grow and
   nationalisation of the sources of income was never dreamt of. As the
   monarchs were engaged in governing the civil life, the administration
   of justice and defence, people enjoyed freedom of speech, freedom of
   worship and freedom of movement; trade, commerce and industry were
   thriving independently in the hands of the public. But the kings were
   keenly watching the acquisition of wealth; instructions regulating the
   ways and means of earning wealth were issued, so that no deviation from
   the paths of virtue took place. Unclaimed properties, tolls and customs
   duties, tributes paid by the sub-ordinate and subdued kings and
   chieftains were added to the exchequer besides the regular land
   mountain and forest revenues from the people.
   56 uṟuporuḷum ulku poruḷum taṉ oṉṉārt
       teṟuporuḷum vēntaṉ poruḷ

   Every taxation was direct and there is no mention of any kind of
   indirect taxation. The Government and the governed were conscious of
   the fact that the wealth acquired by legal and virtuous means served
   the society to do its duties properly and enjoy life to the fullest
   extent.
   57 oṇporuḷ kāḻppa iyaṟṟiyārkku eṇporuḷ
       ēṉai iraṇṭum oruṅku

   Amassing wealth by illicit and unlawful means was ruthlessly condemned.
   The relationship with the neighbouring and other kingdoms was
   maintained by employing able ambassadors and talented spies. The
   service of the spies was utilised to know the mind of the public and
   ascertain the opinion of the people on the working of the various
   departments and services of the government. Corruption, favouritism,
   nepotism and other anti-governmental and anti-social misdeeds were
   detected and eradicated then and there by these exceedingly clever
   spies. Meritorious services of the public men and those of the members
   of the Government were recognised, appreciated and rewarded both
   publicly and privately.
   Medical relief was rendered by the Government and the public; the
   medical science was taught under four heads; the patient, the
   physician, the medicine and the recipe; as a preventive measure,
   propaganda on the regulation of diet was beautifully done. The evils of
   over feeding and underfeeding were taught under medical and health
   education.
   The Government was very attentive in maintaining high ethical standard
   of life among the people. Valluvar bestows more of his thoughts upon
   the general morale of the public. The evils of the demoralising
   elements like disrespect for the elders, infatuated sexual life,
   prostitution, intoxicating drinks and gambling were clearly pointed out
   and condemned. Importance of preserving the high traditions of the
   family and society, protecting the honour of the individual as well as
   the society, paying respect to the greatness of thought, word and deed
   of every member of the society, and safeguarding the nobility of
   conduct and courteousness was duly recognised.
   The economic uplift of a country must start from each family and go on
   spreading first to the co-existing village society and then to the
   country. The welfare of the family stands on two important requisites:
   they are untiring industry and clear worldly knowledge:
   58 āḷviṉaiyum āṉṟa aṟivum eṉa iraṇṭiṉ
       nīḷ viṉaiyāl nīḷum kuṭi.

   The head of the family must take pleasure in the service of others, and
   does not think of his bodily effort which though painful will disappear
   when he feels the joy in making the members happy.
   If this kind of mentality spreads throughout the country, the economic
   need is easily met with. Production of food and commercial crops are
   the two economic fundamentals; agriculture is the only source for these
   two and if it is properly attended to, production increases and thereby
   distribution takes place in the form of trade and commerce. With this
   view in his mind, Valluvar speaks about the agriculture in a pleasant
   instructive language; he proclaims that agriculture and production
   stand as noblest of all economic professions and the fame and name of a
   country rest upon the self sufficiency caused by production. When the
   country is full of natural resources, instead of taking its full
   advantage, if the people feel sorry for their inability to meet the
   demand, Thiruvalluvar says that the lady earth will simply laugh at
   them in contempt.
   59 ilam eṉṟu acaii iruppāraik kāṇiṉ
       nilam eṉṉum nallāḷ nakum.

   Poverty sets in and begging increases in its magnitude when the country
   does not produce sufficiently and supply properly to the full extent of
   the demand of the countrymen. In the chapter on poverty, Thiruvalluvar
   is very graphic in describing its evil; the poverty destroys the noble
   characteristic elements of the parentage and glory of the family in
   which the particular person is born. His mind becomes wild without any
   trace of virtue and even his mother looks down upon him as a wretch.
   Begging is honourable when it is undertaken for a noble cause. For the
   propagation of spiritual knowledge, for feeding the enfeebled, for
   running an orphanage of children etc, mendicancy is allowed. Then it
   becomes the duty of the agriculturist who is engaged in the production
   of goods and of the traders who serve the country by distributing these
   products, to relieve these mendicants. Those who have enough and to
   spare must also feel it their duty to help them. In this connection
   Valluvar says that if there is no beggary, people on earth will be
   inhuman, like a dramatic stage wherein wooden - puppets are brought to
   play.
   60 irappārai yillāta īrṅkaṇ māñālam
       marappāvai ceṉṟu vantaṟṟu.

   There are people who adopt beggary as a profession; the existence of
   such professional beggars is a stigma on the country and it should not
   be allowed to spoil the healthy development of the society. Valluvar
   condemns begging as beneath the human dignity. Even though begging is
   for a noble cause, say, of rescuing an innocent cow from death, it
   brings disgrace to the tongue which spells it. Some go to the extent of
   saying that beggary was already destined to them by the Creator
   himself. But Valluvar refuses to accept it and if it has been ordained
   already, the Creator who did it. must be a fool and He must suffer and
   perish like the beggar 'unto whom the wrong He has done'. But he
   emphasises that nothing is sweeter and more enjoyable than what is
   earned, let it be some watery gruel, by the sweat of one's brow.
   In spite of wealth and other comforts, there are persons who are mean
   in their outlook and ignoble in their word and deed. They can do
   nothing and are never mindful of their own lives. Unless they are
   physically attacked with blows, nothing can be had from them. If
   anything untoward happens, these mean men (kayavar) with readiness sell
   themselves to anything. They possess no individuality and are good for
   nothing.
   In those ancient days we learn that the kings were aspiring for might
   and power.
   Survival of the mightiest was the rule of the day. So, it
   psychologically led them to wage war with their neighbouring kings and
   establish their supremacy. The geographical position of the Chera and
   Pandya kingdoms induced them always to take up arms to expand their
   territories. That the main cause of wars in those days among the Tamil
   Kings was territorial expansion is noticed very often in the
   anthologies of the Sangam age. It is therefore proper that
   Thiruvalluvar assigned primary importance to the military department of
   the Government (paṭai, kuṭi, kūḻ, amaiccu, naṭpu, araṇ, āṟu) i.e. army,
   law and order, wealth, ministry, friendly relations with other kings
   and defence of the strategic points in the state are the six main
   departments under the Government of the monarchs. A well-trained and
   well-equipped army with spirits dauntless and inexorable desire for
   military glory and fame, was considered to be the foremost of the
   constituents of the royal wealth.
   61 uṟuppu amaintu ūṟañcā velpaṭai vēntaṉ
       veṟukkaiyuḷ ellām talai.

   As no artillery or any other scientific weapons was known to the people
   in those days, man-power alone was felt important and the kings were
   interested only in the number and strength of the warriors they
   employed. Unassailable faith in the kings and insusceptibility to any
   kind of sabotaging by enemies were the prominent qualities of the army.
   Heroism, sense of honour, sincere attachment to high traditions of
   military life and clear knowledge of the science and technique of
   warfare were the necessary qualifications of the army.
   62 maṟam māṉam māṇṭa vaḻiccelavu tēṟṟam
       eṉa nāṉ kē ēmam paṭaikku

   Valluvar emphasises upon the role and the efficiency of the generals of
   each battalion, however well equipped and magnificently constituted it
   may be. Success in action and victory in defeating the army are
   dependent upon the lead or command of the military generals. Valluvar
   of course recognises that the essential quality of a true warrior is
   fearlessness but at the same time he affirms that the chivalry of the
   warrior attains glory when his action is attended with mercy and
   devotion to the weak and enfeebled. Ruthless killing of the enemy is
   indeed the main objective of the warfare and the mind of every warrior
   who is engaged in the battle becomes ferocious with feelings of animal
   spirit. When the enemy is perforce enfeebled or disabled, the fighting
   warrior must at once subdue his murderous attitude and with human
   feelings, render to him such help as would be necessary then. In the
   couplet,
   63 pērāṇmai eṉpa taṟukaṇ oṉṟu uṟṟakkāl
       ūrāṇmai maṟṟataṉ eḵku

   Valluvar prescribes this act of chivalry as the most important
   characteristic of each warrior. Supposing the advancing warrior winks
   at the approach of the spear thrown at him by his antagonist, then
   Valluvar pronounces that it tantamount to defeat and retreat.
   The next department of the State called Kudi (kuṭi) is responsible for
   the maintenance of law and order. The real authors of making and
   breaking of law and order are the people of the state. If their
   civic-consciousness is properly trimmed and fostered, permanent peace
   and order will ultimately prevail and the running of the Government
   will be smooth and pleasant. To this effect each member of the society
   must realise his responsibility and duty towards his family which is
   the basic unit of the society and to the state which is the real
   defender of his rights for life on earth. It is therefore prescribed
   that a good citizen must possess proper conduct of social virtue,
   truthfulness and modesty. His civic environment must always be full of
   cheerfulness, charity, sweet and soft exchange of thoughts and words
   and equal treatment of the fellow members of the society. No individual
   who wants to safeguard the noble position his family enjoys in the
   society and the respectability of its members will never stoop to do
   mean things even though they fetch him riches beyond avarice.
   Tamilian Society attaches foremost importance to wealth and it
   considers that wealth is the vital aspect of life, but for which
   earthly life will be miserable. The might and power of kingdoms are
   judged by the amount of wealth in possession of both the Government and
   the public. Valluvar insists that every individual must work hard and
   acquire wealth. According to Valluvar, wealth is a mighty weapon of
   defence and its possession in large amounts proselytises the enemy. The
   wealth provides the country with strong defence and enables the people
   to establish their name and fame in far off countries.
   The importance and the amount of wealth of a people depend entirely
   upon the productivity of the country and the integrity of the country
   men. It is therefore said that the true factors that constitute a
   properly wealthy country are the undiminishing fertility of the soil
   and the unblemished character of the people and the untiring industry
   of the rich. ...
   64 taḷḷā viḷaiyuḷum takkārum tāḻvilāc
       celvarum cērvatu nāṭu.

   The production must be enough and to spare so that people of other
   countries may regard and love it as a sincere source of help. An
   ideally rich country is that which is full of unfailing resources even
   when the surrounding countries face insufficiency and famine. In
   pre-historic days earth was considered to be created as the common
   place of all human beings and no king has any exclusive right over it,
   and hence no Tamil state ever raised any objection against migrations
   of people from one state to another. The immigration itself was not
   felt as a burden but on the other hand the natives received the
   immigrants warmly and provided them with houses to live in and lands to
   till and toil to eke their livelihood honourably. The kings most
   willingly extended their protection to these new-comers till they
   settled themselves to pay the revenue and other taxes. In the meanwhile
   the people of the country shared the additional burden of the
   Government.
   65 poṟaiyoruṅku mēlvaruṅkāl tāṅki iṟaivaṟku
       iṟaiyoruṅku nērvatu nāṭu.

   The Government of each state or country was striving its utmost to
   achieve complete absence of extreme hunger which, if allowed to exist,
   will be detrimental to the peace and tranquillity of life, eradication
   of uncontrollable disease among the people and freedom from implacable
   enmity with other kingdoms. A healthy as well as wealthy country was
   defined as one having no room for cliquism or communalism among the
   people, or for any kind of internal dissensions which will destroy the
   solidarity of the society, or for any formation of rebellious groups of
   anti-governmental murderous elements.
   As regards the physical conditions of a country, unfailing seasonal
   rains and subsoil water were the two important requisites for
   irrigation; a high mountain range densely clad with rich forests is not
   only a strategic protection but serves as a perennial source of income
   and water flow. For defence purposes the country must have strong
   invincible forts and fortresses in all vulnerable points of attack from
   the army.
   To put it short, Thiruvalluvar says that health, swealth, production,
   peace and security are the five vinds of ornaments which adorn the
   national life of a country. In fine, Valluvar reiterates the
   indispensability of the self sufficiency of production and the
   unimpeachable governance of the country; for the former raises the
   economic prestige and honour of the country and the latter renders life
   secure and pleasant.
   MINISTRY: In all monarchical governments, we all know that the king was
   all in all, but yet the real executive head was the minister. It was
   therefore expressed in clear terms that the minister must be well
   educated and extraordinarily intelligent. Technical correctness and
   legality of disposal of governmental transactions do not count for the
   success of a ministry but its each and every action must be in
   accordance with the public opinion.
   66 ceyaṟkai yaṟintak kaṭaittum ulakattu
       iyaṟkai aṟintu ceyal.

   In maintaining the status quo of the Government, the minister must be
   dauntless in his advocacy. If the king in council refuses to listen and
   wants to carry on the business by exercising his royal prerogative,
   Valluvar says that it must be the duty of the minister to cling to the
   principle for which the Government and country stood and on no account
   he should allow his personal interest or the royal favour to corrupt
   his mind.
   67 aṟikoṉṟu aṟiyāṉ eṉiṉum uṟuti
       uḻaiyiruntāṉ kūṟal kaṭaṉ

   Further, the successful discharge of duties. of a minister lies in the
   eloquence of his speech. Logical arrangement and psychological
   presentation of facts clothed in persuasive and impressive language
   ensures complete success in all debates. Eloquence of speech, and
   fearlessness in facing the opponents make an individual indefatigable
   and it is no wonder the whole country moves at his beck and call. The
   sword, the gun powder and the modern atomic energy, everything has
   subjected itself to the control of man and man in turn is controlled by
   thought. Word is a vehicle of his thought. When the word is eloquent
   and sugar-coated, the thought is easily conveyed to the mind of the
   hearer and produces the required effect. It is because of that that the
   present leadership thrives upon its eloquence.
   Being the executive head of the Government the minister must choose
   such actions as will fetch fame and honour to the king and his country.
   If he is really interested in the reconstruction of the state,
   uneconomic and protracting profitless works should not be undertaken.
   Even by way of relieving the people from poverty, the ministry must not
   take up' works which are not remunerative and which on the other hand
   may . drive the country to more misery in the future.
   In the case of taxation which is nothing but a contribution of the
   people to the proper running of the Government, the ministry is
   required to consider the incidence and the paying capacity of the
   people. The levy and collection of taxes must not be felt as a heavy
   burden and the people must be educated to pay them willingly. A clear
   explanation of the expediency of the particular tax will convince the
   tax payer of its necessity. Payment of taxes with heart heavy and eyes
   full of tears breeds contempt and hatred against the Government.
   68 aḻakkoṇṭa ellām aḻappōm iḻappiṉum
       piṟpayakkum naṟpā lavai.

   The deliberations in the council must necessarily culminate in
   decisions and they must in turn be implemented without undue delay. The
   public works both civil and military, when undertaken by the
   Government, must serve as stepping stone for further chain of
   activities and they should not be left incomplete. Otherwise they will
   develop themselves into causes for misunderstanding and revolt in the
   minds of the public against the Government. In dealing with the
   neighbouring kings, such as will ensure friendly relations have to be
   done as quickly as possible; but quicker must be those which help to
   placate the enemies. It is but natural that kings of weak stuff get
   terror-struck at the sight of the big powers and in order that the king
   may be relieved of the fear, the ministers must not hesitate to bend
   their knees before those powers and win their friendly alliance.
   69 uṟaiciṟiyār uṇṇaṭuṅkal añcik kuṟaipeṟiṉ
       koḷvar periyārp paṇintu

   The Royal Council is the place where topics relating to the domestic
   and foreign policies of the Government are discussed and the
   ambassadors and other members of the embassies take part in the
   deliberations. As the peaceful co-existence with the neighbouring
   kingdoms is the only means for the proper security of any state,
   Valluvar is very careful in prescribing the necessary qualifications of
   an efficient ambassador. Lovableness, noble parentage, possession of
   such highly polished qualities as will endear the kings must be innate
   characteristics of an ambassador. Sympathy, intelligence and critical
   insight with captivating eloquence are indispenable for an ambassador.
   Above all, an ambassador must be a man of extensive learning and in the
   midst of the scholars of the Royal courts he should ascend to the top
   most rank leaving none to excel him.
   70 nūlāruḷ nūlvallaṉ ākutal vēlāruḷ
       veṉṟi viṉaiyuraippāṉ paṇpu

   He who is gifted with sound knowledge of men and matters, imposing
   personality and well matured in the analytic and synthetic process of
   political education is best fitted for going abroad as an ambassador.
   The envoy who carries message to other kings must be of spotless
   character, capable of making friends with others and be firm and
   courageous in achieving his end even at the risk of his life. His
   utterance in the Council of foreign kings must be completely free from
   irrelevancy and impertinence. Cogency of ideas and regimentation of
   arguments are especial characteristics of his speech."
   Valluvar feels that certain rules of conduct for those who move more
   closely with kings are necessary. The king's presence must be treated
   as fire side and the ministers and other officers who are privileged to
   be in closer contact should go neither too near nor remove themselves
   too far; the former will breed contempt and the latter will create
   suspicion on their loyalty. Neither age nor close relationship should
   impair the respects due to the kings by the ministers ambassadors and
   other officers. Officers occupying exalted positions in the Government
   and enjoying the royal favour and respect must avoid doing anything
   against the wish of the king. If any thing repugnant to the royal
   desire is done under the cover of old acquiantance, the consequence
   will be irredeemable loss of liberty and privilege enjoyed till now,
   The conduct of these officers must be above any suspicion; suspicion
   once entertained will become indelibly so impressed that nothing on
   earth could remove it.
   71 pōṟṟiṉ ariyavai pōṟṟal kaṭuttapiṉ
       tēṟṟutal yārkkum aritu.

   Of all the intellectual equipments of these officers the capacity of
   reading one's hidden intentions from one's face, according to Valluvar,
   is an ornament to himself and to the kings' court and the particular
   talented officer is considered to be a divine being in human frame. As
   direct recruitment to services was in vogue, the men of divine talents
   were appointed on attractively higher salary. Valluvar is of opinion
   that the reading of human faces and divining the intentions concealed
   in the mind can be acquired by proper training. Human faces are like
   reflecting crystals capable of exposing the nature of the contents of
   the mind within. Valluvar declares that face being the index of the
   mind, a sharp look at the face will be enough for the diviner to read
   the under-current running in the mind. As a sure weapon of safeguard as
   well as defence, the kings have to be well trained in the study of
   facial expressions of people whom he comes across very often.
   Another important requisite of ministers is a sound knowledge of the
   procedure and conduct of business in the council of the state. When the
   house is ready for business, the consensus of the opinion of the
   members must be judged beforehand, and the subject must be introduced.
   In addressing the council, the language of each member has to be polite
   and decent; every word must be weighed and nothing superfluous. Uncouth
   and faulty language will not only fall flat but pull down the personal
   honour and respect of the member. In this connection, Valluvar says,
   self restraint and voluntary silence must be carefully maintained.
   One's power of judgement and brilliance of expression will be
   recognised and appreciated in an assembly of enlightened members, but
   it will be casting pearls before the swine if the audience is
   uncultured and illiterate.
   Thoughts delivered in an audience of wise men become well possessed.
   There are some who become afraid and feel shy when they are required to
   address an assembly of learned men. But these defects can be rectified
   if they are trained properly in the art of eloquence. Taking part in
   the deliberations of an enlightened assembly affords beautiful
   opportunity to acquire more and more of the ever extending knowledge.
   It is the duty of the ministers to learn the art of dialectics through
   the study of logic so as to refute fearlessly the arguments advanced by
   the members of opposition. No purpose will be served by keeping all
   authentic records on hand if the member shudders at the sight of the
   council. This may be due to his nervousness and want of dialectical
   skill. Such persons, however highly learned, will be considered worse
   and their presence in the assembly will be useless.
   FRIENDLY RELATIONSHIP:
   That life on earth will be pleasant only when we are surrounded and
   supported by good friends is a general rule applicable to one and all
   of the human beings. Even mighty kingdoms will fall down if they fail
   to be in friendly relations with other countries. The friendship being
   the necessary requisite for a peaceful and pleasant life, it requires
   fore-thought and careful consideration beforehand. Character, noble
   parentage, nature of faults committed, and association are the main
   factors to be considered before making friends with others. Hasty
   formation of friendship results in endless troubles and disaster.
   71 āyntāyntu koḷḷātāṉ kēṇmai kaṭaimuṟai
       tāṉ cām tuyaram tarum.

   The friendship of persons born of noble family and who are too
   sensitive to do anything disrespectful must be acquired voluntarily
   even if it costs something. By frank exposure of the defects and
   thereby causing repentance on the part of the friends, true friendship
   serves as an immediate loving corrective and it will never tolerate
   guilty conduct among friends. Long standing friendship bound by mutual
   love is really an asset, and its longevity is based upon the generous
   forbearance towards one another. Longer and closer the friendship, the
   more identical are the feelings and thinking among friends. The liberty
   accrued by longstanding friendship induces a person to do without
   previous permission a work on his friend's behalf and even if it by
   chance results in a great loss, it will be readily condoned. If, in
   spite of many defects and drawbacks, a king or his minister is
   undiminished in his affections towards his old and longstanding
   friends, it will raise him high in the estimation of even his enemies
   and convert their enmity into friendship. Realising that the constancy
   in old friendship is dynamic in its force, Valluvar attaches great
   importance to this attitude of the victorious monarchs.
   72 viḻaiyār viḻaiyappaṭup paḻaiyārkaṇ
       paṇpil talaippiriyā tār.

   This omnibus section called Natpu ( naṭpu) by Valluvar includes evil
   friendship, false friendship, friendship of fools, silly persons, and
   persons of hostile temperament, merits and demerits of enemies, enmity
   in the garb of friendship and misbehaviour towards great men. Those
   whose words and deeds are at variance are evil friends and they will
   undo things assigned to them however light they may be. They will
   always be calculative of the benefits they gain by their friendship and
   prove treacherous when occasion warrants their assistance or guidance.
   Falsity of friendship can be easily defeated by the way in which they
   move with us; friendly in our presence and hostile in our absence are
   the main characteristic behaviour of these false friends. And therefore
   it is said that when an opportunity occurs they must be got rid of
   immediately by putting on the same sweet and smiling face. Fools are
   those who are devoid of any sense of humour and incapable of
   discriminating between right and wrong. Lack of interest in anything
   good and complete indifference to personal safe guards form unique
   defect in them. When a fool happens to obtain wealth, all its benefits
   will go to his foes and make them thrive while his close friends as
   well as his kith and kin starve for food. Even among the educators of
   high ethical principles, there are fools who do not conform to what
   they teach and their friendship will cause ruin and disgrace. High
   degree of education fails to train the mind properly of certain
   individuals who are by nature not amenable.
   Separation from friends is indeed painful but Valluvar declares that it
   is exceedingly pleasant when we part with the friendship of fools once
   for all.
   73 peritiṉitu pētaiyār kēṇmai piriviṉkaṇ
       pīḻai taruvatoṉṟu il

   Among our friends there are some who fail to realise the lack of their
   knowledge and attainments whose imperfection is deliberate but think
   very highly of themselves. This silly assumption is called Venmai
   (veṇmai ) in Tamil and it discredits their true wisdom.
   74 veṇmai eṉappaṭuvatu yāteṉiṉ oṇmai
       yuṭaiyamyām eṉṉum cerukku

   This foolish arrogance renders them incorrigible and incapacitates them
   to accept either the advice of wise men or to understand things
   themselves.
   There is also a tendency among some of our friends to contradict
   consciously or unconsciously whatever is said or suggested. This is
   called Ihal (ikal) in Tamil. In some it appears to be an intrinsic
   disease causing antagonism among all. If it is allowed to develop, the
   consequence will be painful misery and helplessness. The person who is
   prone to this evil of promoting feelings of antagonism loses clearness
   of intellectual vision and fails to discover truth.
   75 mikalmēval meypporuḷ kāṇār ikalmēval
       iṉṉā aṟivi ṉavar

   If the friendship of a person of this temperament is felt necessary,
   one must suppress one's opposing feelings and win his co-operation by
   proper accommodation and mild adjustment. Any attempt to excel him by
   counter argument or retaliation will result in open enmity. To put it
   short, the antagonistic temperament is the primary cause for all ruins
   of warfare both internal and external, civil, criminal and political,
   whereas cordial friendliness is of vital importance for peace and
   prosperity in life.
   76 ikalāṉām iṉṉāta ellām nakalāṉām
       naṉṉayam eṉṉum cerukku

   In dealing with the enemies, we need not be anxious about the success
   if the foe is not loved by his kinsmen or supported by mighty allies or
   is not strong himself; if he is cowardly, ignorant of the techniques of
   warfare, not trained in the tactics employed in the battle-front and is
   niggardly, he will fall an easy prey to the enemy. He who does not
   abstain from anger and who babbles all the secretes of diplomatic and
   military character is completely incompetent to launch war against
   anybody. The king who does not take advantage of the knowledge of the
   past history and refuses to adopt such means as will ensure victory and
   who is callous to public odium is ungracious and he cannot dream of any
   success over his enemies. If he is blind in his wrath and inordinately
   lecherous, his fall is undoubtedly certain.
   Great kings will always try to avoid enmity with other kings and it is
   therefore averred by Valluvar that the feelings of enmity ought not to
   be entertained even in a playful mood. It should be the policy of every
   king to convert his enemies into allies and it will bring subsequently
   the whole world, according to Valluvar, under his sovereignty.
   Negligence in this respect may be tolerable in the days of prosperity,
   but when the country is facing the evils of adversity, kings must
   diligently avert wars at any cost. If the enemy is not aware of the
   difficulties, the king must not on any account complain to him; for it
   will betray his weakness and pave way for his downfall. If proper and
   timely measures are taken to strengthen the forces with all the sinews
   of war, the pride of the enemy will certainly fade away.
   77 vakaiyaṟintu taṟceytu taṟkāppa māyum
       pakaivarkaṭ paṭṭa cerukku

   Enmity may take shelter in the mind of the disgruntled friends and
   remain there till an opportunity to do its havoc occurs. Hidden enmity
   is far more dangerous than an open one. Enemies in the guise of
   friendship can be found in the circle of close relations and friends
   and unless they are detected and eradicated immediately, no king or an
   individual can be safe from destruction. Similarly, if the subjects of
   a country harbour any hatred or hostility in their minds against the
   king, the solidarity of the people will wear out and in no time the
   kingdom will be shattered to pieces. Living with the members of a
   family or a state having no harmony at all is just like residing
   together with venomous snakes in a dungeon.
   78 uṭampāṭu ilātavar vāḻkkai kuṭaṅkaruḷ
       pāmpōṭu uṭaṉuṟain taṟṟu

   Of all the safeguards of a king nothing is stronger than the company
   and friendship of great men of learning and noble character. At times
   the insolence of certain kings has provoked them to reject the royal
   favour and put the kings out of gear. Valluvar insists upon the
   imperative necessity of the friendship of the great men, but at the
   same time he does not fail to. point out the delicacy of obtaining and
   maintaining their companionship. Of course a king can provide himself
   with all artificial safeguards but that of great men he must. gain by
   sincere love and respect. Neither his kingship nor his material forces
   can compel this company. Those who want to taste misery and disaster
   may offend these great men and thereby incur their displeasure.
   Valluvar says that such a foolish conduct on the part of a king or a
   rich man will be nothing but falling in the icy hands of Dealth.
   79 kūṟṟattaik kaiyāl viḷittaṟṟāl āṟṟuvārkku
       āṟṟātār iṉṉā ceyal

   According to Valluvar, escape from a wild fire is possible, whereas,
   against the fiery wrath of these great men of supreme spiritual power,
   neither the mightiest of the kings nor the wealthiest of the people of
   inexhaustible resources can withstand.
   80 eriyāl cuṭappaṭiṉum uyvuṇṭām uyyār
       periyārp piḻait toḻukuvār

   -----------
   PART III.
   Gentlemen,
   The third and the last part of Thirukural is Kamatthuppal (kāmattuppāl)
   and I am sorry to say that this has been the topic of mischievous
   propaganda against Valluvar carried on by a section of people in our
   State. Their speeches and writings betray that they have neither
   studied this part nor understood the central idea enshrined in this
   part of Thirukural. For a clear understanding and appreciation of this
   part of Valluvar, one must have studied Tholkappiyam and particularly
   its chapters dealing with the household life of the ancient Tamils. As
   most of the translators and even commentators failed to have a clear
   knowledge of the life of the Tamils depicted in the Sangam literature,
   their translations have gone to the extent of "exposing the translator
   to infamy."
   We remember that Valluvar commences his Kural with household life in
   the beginning. The family unit consists of husband and wife and the
   duties of the household are discharged by both with a common object and
   ideal. The minds of the husband and wife think alike and function
   alike.
   It is a known fact that both the husband and wife were born and brought
   up in different atmospheres and in different families. When the period
   of mating sets in, they meet each other by chance and their minds are
   attracted. In two or three such meetings their minds become united by
   love and they feel that either of them are indispensable to each other
   and in the end they decide themselves to be partners of life. This
   aspect of selecting life partners was left free to the option of
   individuals in those good old days. The section that deals with the
   selection of lifemates is called Kalaviyal. In Karppial, the selection
   is conveyed to the parents and they celebrate the marriage and thus
   confirm their partnership. The newly wedded couple set up a separate
   family of theirs and commence to do the duties pertaining to the
   household life. Immediately after the marriage, the union of their mind
   and the love that binds them together develop. themselves to form an
   indissoluble admixture of psychical elements. This psychological
   bondage is tried and solidified by the onsloughs of familiarity and
   partings caused by duties. The husband realises that
   81 uṭampōṭu uyiriṭai eṉṉamaṟ ṟaṉṉa
       maṭantaiyoṭu emmiṭai naṭpu.

   i. e. the friendship that exists between him and his wife is exactly
   identical with that of the soul and the physical body; that means there
   is no severance during lifetime. On another occasion the husband
   declares:
   82 vāḻtal uyirkkaṉṉaḷ āyiḻai cātal
       ataṟku aṉṉaḷ nīṅku miṭattu

   i.e. living with my wife is as pleasant as my life is to me that
   parting with her even for a short time is as unbearable as the pangs of
   death. The enjoyment of the cordial friendship of these life partners
   is being explained in a couplet as the enjoyment of a householder who,
   living in his own house, derives pleasure in co-sharing his earned
   income with his fellowmen.
   83 tammil iruntu tamatu pāttu uṇṭaṟṟāl
       ammā arivai muyakku.

   Thus we see that this part of Kural is completely devoted to the
   psychological development of the conjugal love which is of fundamental
   importance to lead a virtuously ideal life on earth and after.
   As the result of the false propaganda of a section of people
   unfortunately ill disposed towards the Tamil literature and its
   antiquity, the study of Kamathupal has been deliberately neglected and
   wantonly ignored. It is really a wonder when learned ascetics like Rev.
   G. U. Pope and other scholars of his order express their deep regret
   for their inability to grasp fully the subject matter so beautifully
   dealt with, how these people have come forward to inveigh against
   Valluvar in public and on platforms. I therefore feel that I must be a
   little elaborate in this part of my speech.
   The section Kalaviyal is dealt with in seven chapters. As Valluvar
   wants to explain the gradual psychological development of love in the
   minds of two youths, male and female, destined to become partners of
   life as husband and wife, its every stage in the developing process is
   to be inferred by the reader; so he adopts a dramatic method by
   introducing the lad and the maiden as hero and heroine.
   In the first meeting, they look at each other and by her captivating
   looks, the lad is conquered and his soul and mind are subdued. He feels
   that he is physically powerless on account of the piercing look cast at
   him by the maiden and exclaims that his physical prowess which created
   terror in the mind of his foes when met in the battle, had broken down
   completely at the very sight of the bright forehead of the young lady,
   and at the end he concludes that love has the peculiar quality of
   evoking pleasure by mere sight unlike drinks which intoxicate people
   only when they are taken in
   84 uṇṭārkaṇ allatu aṭunaṟāk kāmampōl
       kaṇṭār makiḻ ceytal iṉṟu

   In subsequent meetings, he gains her looks, glances and hears her words
   and expresses his experience that when he had a look at her, she
   modestly bent her head down and raised it and cast her looks upon him
   when he did not see her. Instead of looking straight at him she simply
   glanced at him once but it spoke volumes about her love. In the midst
   of a company of friends and others, she uttered some words as if she
   was unfriendly to him but after thought confessed to him that it was a
   prudent warning lest anybody should learn the secrecy of their love. In
   another context, he had to hear some hot words from her lips though, at
   the same time, her looks were full of love and encouragement. In course
   of time he understands that the looks of lovers pretend to be strange
   and their words appear to be unfriendly only in the presence of others.
   The secret meetings and exchange of looks are of course physical and
   physiological, but the psychological development of love caused by
   those two factors takes them to the intimate region of the sexual
   pleasure and the ultimate result is pressure of hands or a chaste kiss
   or warm embrace. The lover is pleased to express his experience fo the
   embrace, in a couplet :
   86 piṇikku maruntu piṟamaṉ aṇiyiḻai
   taṉnōykkut tāṉē maruntu
   i. e. disease and medicines are two different things incompatible with
   each other, but in the case of sickness caused by the love of a lady,
   she is the only efficacious remedy. Of course, the embrace of a lover
   is warm but when withdrawn it burns like a fire and when embraced again
   it is soothing. As the lad has had no previous experience, he was
   surprised and then he exclaimed that his lady love had a wonderful fire
   which burnt him when left and cooled him when met and he further
   inquired of himself as to where she could have obtained it. The
   embraces never affect the ever increasing strangeness of pleasure
   derived at any and every time just like the study of great books sheds
   forth new light every time we read.
   87 aṟitōṟu aṟiyāmai kaṇṭaṟṟāl kāmam
       ceṟitōṟum cēyiḻai māṭṭu.

   The smiling looks, loving words and soothing embraces enshrine the lady
   love in the heart of the lover, and he at once begins to adore her in
   his mind. The flowers and the full moon provoke the feelings of love in
   him, and his utterances under this atmosphere are full of similes,
   metaphors and personifications.
   Here a clarification is necessary in respect of the lady love. Even
   though her mind is over whelmed with love she is by virtue of her sex
   incapacitated to give expression openly to her feelings and that is why
   Valluvar has not said anything on her behalf in these chapters dealing
   with secret meetings.
   When they are separated and left alone in their respective places,
   solitude kindles the fire of love and hence she is granted relief to
   give vent to her feelings. The lad in his solitude brings to his mind
   the pleasure he enjoyed in the previous meeting and avers that the
   sweetness of her saliva was exactly like that produced by the admixture
   of milk and honey. Again he says that he never forgets her for a moment
   and if at all any duty removes her from his memory for a short time,
   her qualities of excellence remain permanently in his mind. When the
   lady love is alone, her intimate companion speaks about her lover's
   absence and unto her she replies that he is residing both in her eyes
   and heart and that is why she neither paints her eyes with collieries
   nor takes in hot things lest they should hurt him.
   88 neñcattār kātalava rāka veytuṇṭal
       añcutum vēpākku aṟintu.

   This sort of constant thinking of love raises it to the climax and the
   lover being unbearable of the painful delay in getting the consent of
   parents of his ladylove thinks of proclaiming his love in public. This
   is called Madal (maṭal) in Tamil. Marriage celebrations among Tamils
   were preceded by the open consent of the maiden and her parents and
   therefore the lover insisted upon the preparation of the mind of the
   parents to accept his proposal. In most cases the companion herself
   would prevail upon him to initiate the marriage proposal. Anyhow, a
   considerable period of time is required for their endeavours to bear
   fruit. In the meantime the feeling of love in the hearts of the lovers
   swell to the point of bursting. He says that he was once an embodiment
   of the high sense of honour and manly vigour and hence he restrained
   himself from transgressing the social conventions but then he had
   nothing but stoop to accept the madal—the last resort to effect
   forcible marriage.
   When the love of the lady is communicated to her parents and they are
   ready to accord consent, the lover may take some time by way of
   preparation to go to her house with the elite of the village. This
   period of suspense may aggravate the intensity of her love and even
   drive her to consider herself the feasibility of the madal but in those
   days ladies were exclusively forbidden to adopt madal or express their
   love publicly. Considering her limitations the lady love bewails that
   she is unable to control her feelings and too frail to withstand the
   pain of love, but her. love on the other hand takes off the veil and
   proclaims itself in public.
   The limited sphere of the movements of the lovers at times affords
   ample opportunity for the women folk of the village to know and talk
   openly about their love affair and this may reach both the lovers
   through their companions. This kind of open talk of love affair is
   called Alar in Tamil. Though this is capable of affecting the conduct
   of the lady love, the lover will be in his heart of hearts glad because
   it indirectly confirms his relationship with the lady and thereby
   compels the parents to consent to the marriage. It is in this light
   that the lover says that his dear life is sustained by this open talk
   of scandal which fortunately many people do not understand:
   89 alareḻa āruyir niṟkum ataṉaip
       palar aṟiyār pākkiyattāl.

   And further he adds that the mischievous rumour set afloat by the
   village people nourishes the love that binds him with his lady love;
   otherwise, he thinks, the intensity of the love may languish.
   90 kavvaiyāṟ kavvitu kāmam atuviṉṟēl
       tavveṉṉum taṉmai yiḻantu

   On hearing this rumour, the lady love enquires her companion as to the
   object of these scandalous talks and learns that it was done purposely
   to stifle her love. Then she announces that the attempt to extinguish
   the love she bears to her lover by mischievous scandal is as foolish as
   pouring of ghee over å burning fire to put it out.
   89 neyyāl erinutuppēm eṉṟaṟṟāl kavvaiyāl
       kāmam nutuppēm eṉal.

   From these points dealt with by Valluvar in the chapters on Kalaviyal,
   we understand how would-be householders come in contact with each
   other, how love sets in and binds them inseparably together, how it
   affects the state of indispensability of each and how it prepares them
   to form themselves as partners of life. Instead of you and I they
   become we.
   Newly married life is entitled as Karppiyal (kaṟpiyal) and being the
   solid foundation for the edifice of the household life, it is dealt
   with in 18 chapters. Marriage removes those restrictions which in
   pre-marital days stood in the way of the lovers to come openly in close
   touch with each other and move freely as husband and wife as they do at
   present. They live in a separate house with all comforts at their
   command. They are free from any interference and nothing interrupts the
   proper working of the family. They study each other and by mutual
   sacrifice and adjustment equip themselves for the new life of
   responsibility. Reciprocal love and mutual admirations transform their
   minds to think and act alike.
   In the course of their life, duty intervenes and effects separation of
   the newly wedded husband for some months. He wants to inform his wife
   and take leave but she replies that if his talk is not of his parting,
   she is ready to hear him but if it be about his return, he can inform
   those who survive his absence.
   90 cellāmai yuṇṭēl eṉakku urai maṟṟuniṉ
       valvaravu vāḻvārkku urai.

   In support of her statement she further continues that love and fire
   are alike in burning others but the difference lies in that that fire
   can scorch only those who touch it whereas love burns like anything
   when the loved are at a distance. At last the tug-of-war between love
   and duty ends in yielding decisive success to the latter. During his
   absence loneliness kindles her feelings but she tries to suppress them
   with all her might; to her sad disappointment, love increases in its
   intensity. She says that the pleasure of love is indeed immeasurable as
   ocean but when it begins to torment, on account of partings, greater
   and vaster still are the sorrows that fill up the melancholy mind. The
   pain of love becomes acute and tears roll down from her eyes. She looks
   at her eyes in the mirror and blames them for the lack of fore-thought
   on their part in showing the person of her husband at the outset and
   causing her to fall in love with him. Sleeplessness sets in during
   nights and its stamp is apparent' in her eyes. On noticing this she
   complains to her companion that her eyes do not sleep when her husband
   is absent and even when he returns back, they refuse to sleep a wink
   out of fear that he would leave her once again.
   91 vārākkāl tuñcā variṉ tuñcā āyiṭai
       ārañar uṟṟaṉa kaṇ.

   Constant thinking of love, continuous weeping and sleeplessness reduce
   her body and she appears pale and sickly. Her pallid colour becomes the
   topic of the talk of her companions and when questioned by them, she
   answers that the pallor of her body is due to her consent for the
   departure of her husband and the blame therefore falls on herself.
   Further she says that in spite of her mind always remembering his words
   and herself speaking very eloquently of his loving qualities, the
   pallor stealthily spreads throughout her body. One of her friends
   accuses her husband of negligence for causing the pallid colour over
   her person whereas she being unable to brook it, prefers herself to be
   called pallor provided her friends refrain from accusing her husband
   for unkind desertions.
   The period of absence of the householder depends entirely upon the
   nature of work or business undertaken and the pain of the love of the
   lady due to his separation prolongs accordingly. As days pass away the
   love-sick wife gets dejected with her loneliness and goes even to the
   extent of suspecting the sincerity of her husband's love and
   friendship. She proclaims that the love shown by the lovers to their
   beloved men are quite similar to the blessings showered by the timely
   rain from heavens on people who expect it eagerly and further adds that
   nothing is more bitter than unrequited love.
   When she does not receive any information from her husband, she is
   restless with grief and bewails that, of all the women living on earth,
   none are so miserably afflicted as those who do not get any word of
   consolation from their loved ones. A message from the husband apprises
   her of the laurels he had won but fails to specify the date of his
   return and when questioned by the companion, she replies that though
   her husband does not satisfy her desire by intimating beforehand the
   time of his return, every word from his lips rings melodiously sweet in
   her ears.
   92 nacaiiyār nalkār eṉiṉum avarmāṭṭu
       icaiyum iṉiya cevikku.

   The prospects of meeting of lovers after separation engage their mind
   in thinking of the pleasures of love and their company. The more they
   think of their love the more intoxicated with joy becomes their
   intellect. Strong liquors intoxicate the mind in proportion to the
   volume taken in, whereas the pleasure of love exhilarates the mind the
   moment it is thought of; it is therefore declared as sweeter than any
   intoxicants. When the thoughts of love reign supreme in the mental
   zone, all sufferings from physical, social and economical disabilities
   disappear and as such, love is bound to be good for all people even
   though it is transient. With these observations Valluvar cites some
   utterances of lovers and eloquently expatiates on the irresistible
   influence of love over the human intellect. Mind according to Tamils is
   like a lotus flower wherein things perceived through the senses are
   stored up. The wife thinks that her beloved husband resides in her mind
   and so she confesses that every time his thought occurs he appears
   before her mental eye. When she is steeped in thoughts about his loving
   words and manners, an innocent doubt rises whether she resides in her
   husband's heart as he is always present in hers.
   93 yāmum uḷēm kol avar neñcattu emneñcattu
       ōo uḷarē avar.

   It is also common among the Tamils to interpret sneezing as a
   psycho-physical indication of the thought rising in the mind of the
   lovers, friends and relatives living in distant places. Once the wife
   was about to sneeze but suddenly it passed away. As per the Tamilian
   conception of sneezing, her husband would have wished to think at first
   about her but it must have been given up immediately. As the heroine of
   Valluvar is a well accomplished lady, she could not rely upon its truth
   and asks her companion whether her husband instead of continuing to
   think of her, diverts his mind at once towards something else.
   94 niṉaippavar pōṉṟu niṉaiyār kol tummal
       ciṉaippatu pōṉṟu keṭum.

   Her friend's reply fails to convince her, and there upon she gets
   heated and utters that her husband who excluded her from his mind
   should feel ashamed of appearing frequently in her mental vision.
   95 tamneñcattu emmaik kaṭi koṇṭār nāṇār kol
       emneñcattu ōvā varal.

   Again she remembers the words he spoke both at the time of the proposal
   of his love and on subsequent occasions and thinks that his present
   desertion of his beloved wife falsifies his promises and loving words.
   She gets frightened at the thought of the disaster that invariably
   ensues from all falsehood and insincerities.
   96 viḷiyum eṉ iṉṉuyir vēṟallam eṉpār
       aḷiyiṉmai āṟṟa niṉaintu.

   Unlike hard physical work which produces sound sleep, the intense
   thinking of love troubles the sleep of the young people with dreams.
   When the young wife was advised to save herself from disturbing dreams
   which will in due course affect her health, she refutes her companions
   saying that the dreams of love which present before her mind her loving
   husband who does not favour her with his physical presence on account
   of his stay in far off places serve as elixir of her life.
   97 naṉaviṉāl nalkātavaraik kaṉaviṉāl
       kāṇṭaliṉ uṇṭu eṉ uyir.

   When she is haunted very much by love dreams, she angrily expresses to
   herself that her husband who does not show any compassion on her has no
   right to disquiet her sleep by his appearance in dreams. Her companion
   pitying at her plight condemns her husband for prolonging his absence,
   but, on the other hand, she feels mortified and, out of love to her
   lord, retorts that only those who do not know how compassionately her
   husband moves with her in her sweet dreams will speak strongly of his
   separations. And then she expresses her regret for the ignorance of her
   friends.
   Experience has taught us that all pains both physical and mental appear
   acute and virulent during night time; the sickness of love is no
   exception to it. The setting sun, the fading light of day, the ringing
   of the bells of the cattle on their homeward march in the evening, the
   flute of the cowherd, the sweet fragrance of the blooming flowers and
   the bright cool light of the full moon intensify the poignancy of the
   feelings of love. So, the love-sick lady frowns at the approach of the
   evening and even scolds it as the fatal time of killing the parted
   lovers, particularly women. In the absence of her husband, the incoming
   of the evening appears to her as that of a merciless executioner to the
   platform whereon stands the scaffold. In the day time, as her mind
   engages itself in attending to the regular discharge of the daily
   duties of the household life, her feelings of love are dormant; but
   when the sun sets and darkness comes in throwing every thing out of
   sight, her mind retires from its sensorial region and reverts to think
   of her lover and his love. Loneliness and the separation of her beloved
   husband arouse the feelings of love, and their irrepressibility forces
   her to utter that the pain of love is just like a flower which buds in.
   the morning hours, blooms during day time and blossoms in the evening:
   98 kālai arumpip pakal ellām pōtāki
       mālai malarum in nōy.

   Thus the sorrows of love consequent upon the absence of the husband
   consume her physical essence and result in the loss of colour and
   reduction of beauty of the face, eyes and other parts of her body. When
   the friendly talk of her companion turns towards the change that has
   taken place in her, she simply says that her husband has caused this
   separation purposely to effect these changes in her. She says "Even if
   I am silent, my eyes streaming with tears, shoulders shrunken and
   armlets slipping proclaim the callousness and cruelty of the heart of
   my parted husband”. At the same time, her husband is also not unaware
   of the change of her complexion and form caused immediately by his
   separation. In one of his soliloquies he says that when once he
   loosened his hands from the ecstatic embrace he avails of her, being
   unbearable of this slight separation, her lustrous forehead changed
   itself into pallid and immediately her looks also became pale.
   99 muyaṅkiya kaikaḷai ūkkap pacantatu
       pētai perumaḻaik kaṇ.

   On seeing this his keen intellect begins to rationalize the change, the
   after-effect of the slight release of his arms and he speaks out in his
   usual philosophic language that the pallor of her eyes is due to their
   sympathy with the fading brightness of her forehead.
   100 kaṇṇiṉ pacappō paruvāl eytiṉṟē
       oṉṉutal ceytatu kaṇṭu.

   The pain of love gets intensified by loneliness and even breaks off the
   control of herself. She requests her mind to suggest any remedy for her
   sickness caused by love. The loving words her husband spoke and the
   sweet caresses he lavished flash upon her mind and produce a strong
   craving to see him in person. She implores her mind to take with it her
   eyes also to her lord because, she says, they eat her vitals in the
   fiery desire to see him personally.
   101 kaṇṇum koḷaccēṟi neñcē ivai eṉṉait
       tiṉṉum avarkkāṇaluṟṟu.

   If her mind succeeds in its attempt to see him, she advises it in her
   innocent girlish torte not to succumb to his loving caresses but to
   make a mock quarrel with him which according to her line of thinking
   sweetens the pleasure of the meeting. In another mood, she asks her
   mind which is burning with desire to see her husband as to where it
   wants to go while he is residing in her heart.
   Modesty and maidenly reserve are two prominent traits of the youth of
   the fair-sex. When the feelings of love are intense, self-restraint and
   womanly reserve are rendered too impotent to withstand. Even if the
   love is suppressed, anyhow it breaks out like a sudden sneeze.
   102 maṟaippeṉmaṉ kāmattai yāṉō kuṟippiṉṟit
       tummal pōl tōṉṟi viṭum.

   Her companion intervenes with the remark that love becomes painful and
   dishonourable when it is not requited with equal compassion but she
   replies that the noble attitude of rejecting oneself to hang on those
   who are not inwardly well disposed of is unknown in the case of lovers.
   103 ceṟṟār eṉak kaiviṭal uṇṭō neñcē yām
       uṟṟāl uṟāa tavar.

   Further she adds that the maidenly reserve which is the protecting
   guard of honour of her sex is shattered to pieces by the sweet
   appeasing words of the lover.
   104 paṉmāyak kaḷvaṉ paṇimoḻi yaṉṟō nam
       peṇmai uṭaikkum paṭai

   The incessant thinking of love and the lover infuses the mind with a
   distressingly burning desire to meet each other. She loses her patience
   and becomes erotic. She says that her existence is solely dependent
   upon the return of her husband and therefore she cannot avoid thinking
   of him even though it is the only course of easing her mind from grief.
   If she forgets him, she fears that her colour and beauty will be
   irrecoverably lost and asserts herself that the pallor which eclipses
   the beautiful colour of her shoulders will disappear at the very sight
   of her lord. In her erotic mood, she regrets that she is not clear
   whether she would maintain her womanly reserve and be glum or rush
   forth and embrace him and vacillates between the two when her beloved
   husband returns.
   Though it is incumbent on the householder to be hospitable to all
   guests and strangers, the housewife is prohibited to receive them when
   her husband is absent from head quarters. This primary duty is
   suspended on account of his long absence and hence the wife is very
   eager to resume it because she knows that the family life is imperfect
   by its suspension. She receives a message from her husband informing
   her of his victory in the warfare and return. She rejoices on its
   receipt and says,
   105 viṉaikalantu veṉ ṟīka vēntaṉ maṉai kalantu
       mālai ayarkam viruntu.

   i. e. let my kingly husband return victorious and let us honour him
   with a feast in the evening. Unfortunately the return journey of the
   equally impatient husband is delayed by a short period and hence he
   gets disheartened. In a pessimistic tone, he utters then that his
   beloved wife will be broken-hearted and perhaps lose her life and his
   return to the house, the sight of her face and the cold embrace of her
   person will be of no avail.
   106 peṟiṉ eṉṉām peṟṟakkāl eṉṉām uṟiṉ eṉṉām
       uḷḷam uṭaintukkak kāl.

   The husband returns home and the domestic life resumes its full vigour
   and regularity. In her sexual life which is but the natural
   consummation of love, her blooming young mind entertains a suspicion
   that her enjoyment of love will be interrupted by further partings. Her
   modesty and womanly reserve do not permit her to express it in words.
   But, anyhow, it is detected by her judicious husband and he says to her
   that in spite of her attempt to hide, her eyes are capable of
   disclosing that there is something in her mind. To a shrewd observer,
   it appears like a thread running through transparent crystal beads and
   the bud of a flower holding within its characteristic sweet fragrance.
   107 maṇiyuḷ tikaḻtaru nūlpōl maṭantai
       aṇiyuḷ tikaḻvatoṉṟu uṇṭu.
       108 mukaimokkuḷ uḷḷatu nāṟṟam pōl pētai
       nakai mokkuḷ uḷḷatu oṉṟu uṇṭu.

   In like manner, she is also very discreet in studying the mental
   contents implied in the art of his love making. Exceeding caresses,
   extraordinarily sweetened words and excessively rapturous embraces and
   fervent kisses of her husband indicate that she should prepare herself
   to endure another parting in the immediate future. With care and
   delicacy, his departure is conveyed to her through her companion. The
   companion returns with the words:
   109 toṭi nōkki meṉṟōḷum nōkki aṭinōkki
       aḵtu āṇṭu avaḷ ceytatu.

   i. e. "On hearing your departure, she did not utter any word but simply
   looked at first her armlets, then at her tender arms and lastly she
   arrested her looks at her feet; this is what she did.”
   The sexual union between two people who love each other is the true
   sacrament of marriage, the outward and visible sign of inward and
   spiritual unity. At the moment of the union, their spirits as well as
   the physical bodies rise together to a flame of indescribable ecstasy.
   Sexologists say that it is an experience which seems to have nothing to
   do with worldly attributes; it is shared alike by rich and poor, by
   those who are clever and those who are not; it cannot be achieved by
   will power. Money cannot buy it. It is one of the most precious-gifts
   that love can bring to marriage. Ellen Key describes it as "harmony
   between body and soul in relation to love". According to Havlock Ellis,
   “it is the natural instinct of dignity and temperance". When the
   companion of the lady suggested to her to dismiss from her mind the
   love which was the cause of all her sorrows when her husband was away,
   the gentle lady replies that her love towards her husband is such that
   even when he is indifferent and does whatever he likes without any
   regard for her, she cannot have peace without seeing him in person.
   Just as her eyes do not see the point of the brush, when she paints
   them with colliriyum, so also, she says, she forgets all his
   indifference and disregard.
   110 eḻutuṅkāl kōlkāṇāk kaṇṇē pōl koṇkaṉ
       paḻi kāṇēṉ kaṇṭa viṭattu.

   Once she decided herself to be glum to her husband, but, when he
   approached her with bended knees and looks beaming with love, her
   determination melted away and she at once fell into his arms. During a
   conversation with her companion who instructed her to be strong and
   firm in her attitude towards her husband, at least when he craved for
   her love, she, with a view to show the futility of the piece of her
   advice, replied,
   111 uyttal aṟintu puṉal pāypavarē pōl
       poyttal aṟintēṉ pulantu.

   i.e. like one who knowing fully well that the rapidly flowing flood
   will carry one away, jumps deep into it and drowns, my attempt to deny
   him becomes ridiculously baffled. When shy tries to feign anger, he
   enlightens her by saying that true love is like a blossoming tender
   flower full of sweet fresh fragrance and only very few take advantage
   of it.
   112 malariṉum mellitu kāmam cilar ataṉ
       cevvi talaippaṭu vār.

   The advice, suggestions and instructions of the companions and the
   influence of her intense love create a contrarious tendency in her. She
   thinks that her husband is indifferent and does not require his love.
   When love kindles her desire, a regular conflict between her mind and
   action breaks out and she accuses her mind of its inconsistency and
   questions as to why it does not remain with her even on seeing that the
   mind of her husband never leaves him.
   113 avarneñcu avarkkātal kaṇṭum evaṉ neñcē
       nī emakku ākātatu.

   She ponders over her plight and bewails that those who are economically
   ruined in life are deserted even by their close friends, and in like
   manner, her mind forsakes her and runs after him affectionately. In
   another mood, she sympathises with her mind and says that her mind is
   haunted with constant fear, because it is afraid that he may withdraw
   his affections and even when he displays his compassion, it fears that
   he would leave it alone
   114 peṟāamai añcum peṟiṉpirivu añcum
       aṟāa iṭumpaittu eṉ neñcu.

   Further she realises that none will be worthy of sincere friendship, if
   one's mind is otherwise disposed, and the reason why her mind which is
   desperately in love with her soul, always thinks of the noble virtue of
   her husband is that it will ultimately bring disgrace if he is spoken
   ill of.
   115 eḷḷiṉ iḷivām eṉṟeṇṇi avartiṟam
       uḷḷum uyirkkātal neñcu

   Most of the romantic novels written by our contemporary writers begin
   with the love of the hero and heroine and after dealing with the
   obstacles on their way, conclude in the winning of the heroine by the
   hero or in the reconciliation of the hero and heroine. But, in our
   practical life, this is the beginning and not the end. As a matter of
   fact, "people in love usually marry an idealised image of each other
   and afterwards they have to learn the real person they have married".
   The newly married couple must gradually adapt their personalities to
   each other and their mental love helps them with patience and
   understanding. Of these two, to be coquettish is the natural instinct
   of the wife and, like all women in general, she desires always to be
   pursued and conquered, but at the same time, she is too contrarious or
   too shy to be able to show it.
   This tendency very often makes the loving couple treat each other with
   a kind of cold reserve of sulkiness or petulance. In the beginning, the
   sulkiness formed by the innate desire of being pursued intensifies the
   love in the mind of the loving wife and the husband and 'increases the
   pleasure of their physical union. In this sulking mood, a wife may be
   cold and almost antagonistic but she can be thawed by the skilful art
   of love making. Valluvar, we know, is dead against entertaining any
   kind of hostility even in a playful mood. He therefore examines the
   propriety of this petulance and pronounces his opinion. He compares
   this to the seasoning of food with salt. Just as adequate seasoning
   renders the food very palatable and any excess completely spoils it, so
   also the sulkiness on the part of the wife, if prolonged, defeats its
   purpose and perhaps leads to danger.
   116 uppu amaintaṟṟāl pulavi atu ciṟitu
       mikkaṟṟāl nīḷa viṭal.

   On the other hand the intelligent husband is fully aware of this
   feminine trait of coquettishness and its healthy reaction in his heart.
   When she is adamant in her caustic sulkiness, he appraises her that it
   is worthy of the excellence of the noble qualities of the fair-sex in
   general.
   117 nalattakai nallavarkku ēer pulattakai
       pūvaṉṉa kaṇṇār akattu.

   On hearing these words, she gets frightened that he would neglect her
   to droop without installing the sweet thrill of joy by his warm
   embrace. She gives vent to her feelings that the leaving carelessly of
   the love of sulking ladies to languish is nothing but cutting away the
   tender root of an already withering creeper.
   118 ūṭiyavarai uṇarāmai vāṭiya vaḷḷi
       mutal arin taṟṟu.

   As love and hatred are closely allied, people who have been in love
   tend to flare up over trifles. Jealousy also plays an equal part in
   disturbing the pleasure of the young couple. Every friendship not only
   with the other sex is regarded with suspicion; every word and action is
   misinterpreted. On account of these groundless suspicion, jealousy and
   hatred, if any word or deed gives room, drive her to think that her
   husband is not faithful and responsive. She becomes nervy and emotional
   and feels herself that her pride and self-esteem are hurt and insulted.
   In the case of young couple bound by pure and sincere love, this false
   suspicion, groundless jealousy and affected hatred help to prolong the
   congenial atmosphere to their sex life. When the husband approaches her
   earnestly, she is influenced by these love nourishing jealousy,
   suspicion and misunderstanding and refuses his warm embrace. She says
   that his broad chest is looked at covetously by the womenfolk and
   therefore she cannot suffer herself to his arms. One day she picked up
   a groundless quarrel and was resolute in her silence. With a view to
   break her silence and reserve, he voluntarily aroused in himself a
   sneeze. Immediately she pronounced "long life to you. This incident is
   narrated briefly with all the literary embellishments in the couplet,
   119 ūṭi yiruntēmāt tummiṉār yām tammai
       nīṭuvāḻ keṉpāk kaṟintu.

   On the other other hand, the young loving husband is more eloquent in
   describing her petulant words and behaviour. Once he plucked some
   blossoming beautiful flowers from the branches of a tree and adorned
   the tresses of her hair; but, instead of being pleased, she burst out
   in anger and said that he purposely did this to show his skill in the
   adornment of flowers to some other lady in love with him.
   120 kōṭṭuppūc cūṭiṉum kāyum oruttiyaik
       kāṭṭiya cūṭiṉar eṉṟu.

   In another couplet, he says that when he sneezed, she, as usual, wished
   him long life and in the next . moment, she changed her mind and cried
   bitterly requesting him to say as to who his lady friend was, whose
   thought gave rise to this sneeze.
   121 vaḻuttiṉāḷ tummiṉēṉāka aḻittu aḻutāḷ
       yār uḷḷit tummiṉīr eṉṟu.

   Here a genuine doubt may arise as to the disconcerting tendency of
   picking up groundless quarrels in the minds of love-bound householders
   and may create an unhealthy atmosphere and impair the proper discharge
   of the domestic duties; but practical experience has proved it
   otherwise. It has enriched the pleasures of love, the ultimate fruit of
   setting up a peaceful family. It must be clearly understood that the
   temporary pleasant misunderstandings and mock-quarrels occurring in the
   sexual life tend to tame the latent animal spirit which shows its ugly
   head, when the male individual gets heated with violent feelings of
   passion. This is beautifully substantiated in a couplet in the form of
   a reply of a young wife to her companion who objects to her teasing
   attitude of unwarranted petulance. She states that even though her
   husband is entirely free from any fault, the petulance on her part is
   capable of exposing the true nature of his love on her.
   122 illai tavaṟu avarkku āyiṉum ūṭutal
       vallatu avar aḷikkum āṟu.

   Her companion is persistent in pointing out that by her petulant
   attitude towards her loving husband, hatred which is allied to love,
   may of course enter in his mind, and however smaller in measure, it
   will mar the free flow of his compassion. The wife accepts the truth of
   the statement of her friend but excuses herself saying that though her
   frequent sulking disturbs his love, it rises high in the esteem of
   lovers.
   But at the same time she reiterates her conviction of the petulance in
   her behaviour before her husband that there is a kind of pleasure in
   the short severance from his sweet embrace, even though he does not
   deserve to be treated so.
   123 tavaṟu ilarāyiṉum tām vīḻvār meṉṟōḷ
       akaṟaliṉ āṅku oṉṟu uṭaittu.

   She further says that, in taking food, to see what was eaten has been
   digested well is pleasant; similarly, in love, wantonly picking up
   groundless quarrels is more pleasurable than the erotic embrace which
   is ultimate.
   124 uṇaliṉum uṇṭatu aṟal iṉitu kāmam
       puṇartaliṉ ūṭal iṉitu.

   These love quarrels make love enjoyable and the love subsequently makes
   their physical union sublime.
   125 ūṭutal kāmattiṟku iṉpam ataṟku iṉpam
       kūṭi muyaṅkap peṟiṉ.

   Thus we come to the conclusion that sublimation is the sole object and
   purpose of both the psychical harmony and physical union of the husband
   and wife of an ideal family, the fundamental unit of the human society.
   Gentlemen,
   By way of concluding my speech, I feel it is my legitimate duty now to
   dispel the erroneous doubt caused by some scholars by pronouncing very
   deliberately that Thiruvalluvar has only translated the Kama Sutra of
   Vatsayana. We know of course that one of the old commentators of Kural,
   Parimelalagar, is a great scholar in Sanskrit and if it is a fact, he
   would have certainly mentioned this in his introduction, to Kamathupal
   as he has referred to the Sanskrit works of the famous king Bhoja. But
   I do admit that the absence of any reference to Vatsayana cannot be a
   sound reason to reject their view. I therefore beg to be permitted to
   give a brief summary of the content of the Kama Sutra of Vatsyana for
   favour of your kind and fair judgment.
   Vatsa yana's Kama Sutra consists of seven chapters called Adhikaranas,
   namely, Sadharana, Samprayogika, Kanya Samprayuktaka,Bharyadhi karika,
   Paradarika, Vaisika and Oupanishadha.
   In the Sadharana Adhikarana, there are seven prakaranas or topics, the
   first of which is but a brief sketch of the book just as we find
   chapters like Prachna Mala in some of the Bashyams in Sanskrit. The
   acquisition of Trivarga (Dharma, Artha, Kama) and an account of lores
   are given in the succeeding two Prakara nas. A clear description of the
   various qualities of a gallant gentleman and those of his friends and
   messengers who go between him and his mistress is given in the last two
   prakaranas, Nagaraka Vruttam and Nayaga Sahya Dutikarma Vimarsa.
   The second adhikarana called Samprayogika deals with sexual union under
   seventeen topics such as embracing, kissing, gentle scratching, mild
   biting, Samvesana (Cohabitation) and the various forms of coition.
   Here, Vatsayana goes to the extent of enunciating certain rules for the
   commencement and termination of coitus, and treats about love-quarrel
   (Pranaya Kalahah) which breaks out at the height of ecstasy.
   In the Kanya Samprayuktaka adhikarana, choosing of the brides,
   confirmation of the marrital alliance, winning of the confidence of the
   bride, indication of the physical manifestation of the psychic
   emotions, Solo-efforts, acceptance of the bride by necessary means and
   the different kinds of marriages are discussed in detail.
   The fourth adhikarana describes the various duties and conduct of the
   loyal wife during her conjugal state and the separation from her of her
   husband, the duties of the first and the second wives, those of the
   re-married virgin widow (Punarbhu Vrutham) and those of an unlucky wife
   and the inmates of the harem (Antah puri kam). It is on this account,
   this adhikarana is . entitled as Bharyadhi Karika.
   The fifth section, Paradharika, deals with the different good qualities
   of men and Women, causes for dislike of each other, people who succeed
   in seducing others' wives, women who are easily seduced, means by which
   the acquaintance of other women are made, testing of their mental
   attitude, duties of the messengers, love towards women in higher status
   (Isvara Kamitam) and the protection of one's wife from being seduced.
   The sixth adikarana on Vaisika (Harlots) consists of nine prakaranas:
   they are (1) consi deration of friends both fit and unfit and causes
   for their approach (Sahaya gamya gamya gamana karana chintha), (2)
   winning over the fit (gamyopa Varttanam), (3) gratification of the
   lover (Kanthanu Varttanam), (4) ways and means for earning money (artha
   gamyopayah) (5) attitude towards the displeased (Vrakta prathipathih),
   (6) methods of expulsion (Nish kasana prakarah), (7), re-union with the
   expelled person (Visirna prathisanthanam), (8) special advantages (Laba
   Viseshah) and (9) judging of the advantages and disadvantages,
   consequences and doubts (Arthanarthana bandha somsaya Vicharah) and the
   special harlots (Vesya Viseshah).
   The seventh and the last adhikarana, Oupanishadha, deals with some
   secret formulas under six headings, namely, (1) recipes for making one
   charming (Subha gangankaranam), (2) means of making oneself attractive
   (Vasikaranam), (3) recipes on stimulants (Vrushya yogah), (4) revival
   of lost love (Nashta raga pratya nayanam), (5) means for development
   (Vrudhi vidhayah) and (6) strange recipes (Chitra yogah).
   A cursory reading of the topics and the contents of Kama Sutra cited
   above and a superficial comparision with the contents of the Kamatthu
   Pal of Kural will expose to you the fallacy of the argument and the
   falsity of the statement that Tiruvalluvar's Kamathu Pal is a
   translation of Vatsayana's Kama Sutra. On the other hand it must be
   clearly understood that Tiruvalluvar's treatment of Kamatthu Pal in
   Tirukural is completely orginal and the thoughts and ideas found in it
   are expressed purely in accor dance with the indigenous spirit and
   concept of the Tamilans. Tiruvalluvar is precisely psycho logical and
   entirely free from the vulgar and indecent sexualities such as found in
   other books dealing with sex.
   It is a great misfortune for the Tamils to have in their midst some
   scholars who in the name of research dare not hesitate to misrepresent
   things and utter falsehood to impress both the unlettered people of the
   Tamil land and the influential non-Tamils that nothing is original in
   Tamil. That day is fast approaching when the political, social,
   economic, cultural and literary history will be brought to light and
   the false attempt to belittle the cultural eminence of the Tamils will
   be frustrated. Thanks to the ardent love being evinced towards the
   study of Kural, people are becoming enlightened. Thanks. 'Long live
   Tiruvalluvar. ..
   ------
     __________________________________________________________________

   This file was last updated on 9 dec. 2019.
   Feel free to send the corrections to the webmaster.

References

   1. https://www.projectmadurai.org/
