                                 [pmdr0.gif]
                     ___________________________________

                    caṅka kālattil tamiḻ nāṭṭil
                    peṇkaḷiṉ nilai (coṟpoḻivu)
                        ciṟpi pālacupramaṇiyaṉ

           The Status of Women in Tamil Nadu During the Sangam Age
                     Lectures by Dr. C. Balasubramanian
                    In tamil script, unicode/utf-8 format
                     ___________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   Acknowledgements:
       We thank the Tamil Virtual Academy for providing an electronic
       version of this work.
       This work has been prepared using Google OCR online tool to
       generate the e-text and
       subsequent proof-reading. We thank P. Sukumar, A. Sezhiyan and R.
       Navaneethakrishnan
       for their help in the proof-reading. Preparation of HTML and PDF
       versions: Dr. K. Kalyanasundaram, Lausanne, Switzerland.
       © Project Madurai, 1998-2016.
       Project Madurai is an open, voluntary, worldwide initiative devoted
       to preparation
       of electronic texts of tamil literary works and to distribute them
       free on the Internet.
       Details of Project Madurai are available at the website
       [1]http://www.projectmadurai.org/
       You are welcome to freely distribute this file, provided this
       header page is kept intact.
         ______________________________________________________________

       source:
       The Status of Women in Tamil Nadu During the Sangam Age
       Dr. C. BALASUBRA MANIAN
       Vice - Chancellor. TAMIL UNIVERSITY. ΤΗΑΝJΑVUR - 613 005.
       МАRUМАLАRР РАТlРРАКАМ. MADRAS - 6OO O29
       Selling rights :
       PAARI NILAYAM, 184, PRAKASAM SAALAI, MADRAS-600 1 08.
       ------------------
       F Ο R Ε W Ο R D
       Dr. MALCOLM. S. ADISESHIAH,
       Vice-Chancellor, University of Madras
       It is appropriate that 1975 which was proclaimed by the United
       Nations as the International Women's Year and the following year
       1976 which was declared by that same august body as the start of
       the United Nations Decade for Women should see the publication by
       the University of Madras of the Diwan Bahadur K. Krishnaswami Rao
       Endowment Lectures 1971-72 devoted to the subject, “The Status of
       Women in Tamil Nadu during the Sangam Age.” The status of women is
       a theme which has no beginning and no end. It is perennially alive
       and insistently challenging.
       Reading through this clear, concise and illuminating historical
       commentary on the status of women in this part of our vast country
       at the time of Valluvar's famous writings and Nakkirar’s memorable
       poems, two thoughts come to my mind.
       The first is whether we, the people of India, the community in
       Tamil Nadu, will learn from history. This is an important issue
       because nothing that has been adumbrated on the status of women
       either internationally in the World Plan of Action adopted by the
       United Nations Conference on the Status of Women held last year in
       Mexico city of set forth in detail, precision and majestic sweep in
       our National Report on the Status of Women in India entitled,
       “Towards Equality,” contains anything that has not been recorded
       two thousand years ago, as evidenced in the lectures published in
       this monograph. And so the question is, will we learn from history
       or will we once more live up to the generalisation that the only
       lesson that men (and women) learn from history is that they never
       learn from history?
       The second issue is related to our capacity for verbalisation and
       the consequences of our normative lifestyles. How far are the
       characterisations, rights and qualities attributed to women in the
       Sangam Age a reflection of what was in fact the practice, the
       reality in existence? Are the various facets of the portrayal of
       the Status of Women normative standards set forth or descriptions
       of conditions as they existed. On the capacity for verbalisation,
       we, as a people, seem to possess somewhat unique abilities. Anyone
       reading through two thousand years from now - say in 4001 A.D.— our
       laws, exhortations, economic, social and juridicial writings and
       political manifestos and rhetoric that issued between 1970-75 about
       eradicating poverty would naturally come to the conclusion that we
       had abolished poverty in this land by the nineteen seventies. Again
       our sacred literature is really a series of normative essays in the
       nature and being of God, man and the duties and obligations
       incumbent on us as a consequence of the God-Man equation. It has
       little relation to how we conduct our religious and secular life in
       the daily round which makes up our being. And so the question is
       whether we can slow down on our capacity for verbalism and practice
       a little of what we preach, can we close even a little the yawning
       and growing gap between the normative and positive in our lives?
       If we can move a little further forward on both these issues—learn
       from our history and live by what we say — then, | believe this
       monograph by Dr. Balasubramanian would have served a useful and
       necessary purpose.
       University Buildings, MALCOLM. S. ADISESHIAH,
       31st May 1976. Vice-Chancellor.
       ----------------
       A Word Ere you Read…
       Sangam age is regarded as the * Golden Age" in the history of Tamil
       Literature. As rightly pointed out by Xavier S. Thaninayagam,
       "Sangam Tamil has the characteristic of being extremely concise and
       curt of delineating magnificient word—pictures with great economy
       of language." To put it in a nutshell, ‘brevity was the soul of
       Sangam wit." But, it is noteworthy that a number of comprehensive
       volumes have been published on Sangam Literature, and yet to be in
       the future also. Such is the greatness of Sangam classics.
       The present volume deals precisely with the status of women in all
       dimensions in Tamil Nadu during the Sangam age. It is to be
       remembered that the scope of this study is limited for obvious
       reason. But, I hope it will certainly inspire the scholars to take
       up further profound studies.
       With a deep sense of gratitude, I sincerely thank Dr. Malcolm S.
       Adiseshiah for having adorned this volume with his venerable and
       valuable foreword and Prof. Dr. N. Sanjeevi for his excellent
       encouragement. I am also deeply indebted to Thiru C. K.
       Kumaraswamy, the Registrar, University of Madras for his prompt
       help in bringing this volume to light.
       I hope the Tamil world would warmly welcome this volume.
       9-6- 1976, Dr. С. ВАLASUВRAМАNIAN
       Madras-600 005, }
       ---------------
       The Diwan Bahadur K. Krishnaswami Rao Endowment Lectures 1971-72
       BY
       DR. C. BALASUBRAMANIAN
       -----------
       THE STATUS OF WOMEN IN TAMIL NADU DURING THE SANGAM AGE
       Revered President, Ladies representing Motherhood,
       Learned Colleagues, Scholars and Gentlemen!
       The honour of delivering the Diwan Bahadur Krishnaswami Rao
       Endowment lectures this year has been graciously extended to me by
       the University of Madras; and for this I am extremely beholden to
       the distinguished Vice-Chancellor of the University, Padmasri N. D.
       Sundaravadivelu and the members of the Syndicate of the University.
       My heartfelt thanks are due to Thiru. C. E. Ramachandran, Head of
       the Department of History and Dr. N Sanjeevi, Head of the
       Department of Tamil, University of Madras, but for whose
       encouragement and assistance, I could not have accepted this great
       responsibility.
       | deem it a great honour and privilege to deliver this talk under
       the Presidentship of Padmabhushan Dr. T. M. P. Mahadevan, who is
       one of the outstanding Philosophers in modern India, nay in the
       whole world. His vast erudition and comprehension of the Philosophy
       of Sankara i.e. Advaita have been recognised the world over, and
       his illuminative exposition of the Philosophy has been frequently
       sought after, by scholars of India as well as foreign.
       Under the convention governing this Endowment I am obliged to
       deliver the lectures in English, even though Tamil would have been
       the appropriate medium. However I shall be supplementing my English
       talk with a few relevant quotations from the Tamil classics.
       The subject of my talk today and tomorrow is “The status of women
       in Tamil Nadu during the Sangam age." You are all aware that the
       matter has already been thoroughly discussed by many scholars, and
       much light has been focussed on the social conditions of women
       during the Sangam period.
       I hope my sense of humility will not be misunderstood if I may
       disclose to you that I myself had been interested in this study for
       a pretty long time, in fact from the days I had been an
       undergraduate in the Government Arts College, Madras. I am happy to
       state that during my teenages, I was inspired to compose a poem on
       the “Rights of Women,” and I am gratified to mention that among the
       competitors drawn from three Universities, I won the distinction of
       being awarded the first prize for the poem.
       My interest in the conditions and welfare of women of Tamil Nadu
       was kept sustained by the valuable and close contacts I had with
       one of the greatest of scholars of all time Thiru. Vi Ka. and the
       distinguished poet, Baaratidasan who was at once a visionary and a
       revolutionary.
       I should like to take this opportunity to acknowledge with love and
       respect, that the greatest source of inspiration in my literary
       pursuits had been my mentor, Dr. M. Varadarajanar. It was a unique
       experience for me to find that all these three distinguished men of
       letters possessed a very tender heart, towards women and advocated
       the enthronement of women as goddesses of the earth. As a student I
       sat at the feet of the learned Professors and Lecturers of
       Pachaiyappa's College and drank deep at the founts of the ancient
       Sangam literature, and I learnt more and more of the greatness of
       womanhood. Now that an opportunity had presented itself, I seized
       it quickly to express the results of my own examination of the
       condition and status of women of the Sangam Age.
       The Tamils have enriched the Hindu philosophy by contributing to it
       the Sakti-Sivam Tatva which is peculiar to the Saiva Siddhanta
       system of thought. The Tamils have always believed in the
       manifestation of God as Sivam and Sakti in a single form. Saint
       Appar realised at Tiruvaiyāru in his ripe old age that the Supreme
       God had manifested Himself in this Sakti-Sivam aspect in all the
       categories of life on earth. He has described the Vision he had of
       this aspect in one of the most beautiful soul stirring and oft
       quoted hymns commencing with “Mādhar Piraikkanniyānai.”
       Kavimani Dösika Vināyakam Pillai, one of the most loved and
       respected modern poets sings in simple and chaste Tamil, that one
       should have performed severe penance in the previous births to be
       gifted to be born a woman on earth [1]. Poet Bhāratidasan sings
       that a wife sublimates her husband's life and guides him on the
       correct path. [2] . He further exalts the womanhood of Tamil Nadu
       and states that it is due to the feminine touch that man becomes
       generous, attains moral height and acquires all the masculine
       virtues [3] . His appreciation of the fair sex reaches sky high
       when he says that a woman values her husband's grace towards her as
       the very essence of her life even though he might have forsaken her
       [4] .
       The Sangam literature uniformly praises the womanhood of Tamil
       Nadu. The women of the Sangam period had distinguished themselves
       in their cultural attainments and virtuous living. Avvaiyār, the
       great poetess of very high literary attainments, untrammelled
       wisdom, and strength of purpose addresses the land in these words:
       “O Land, you may be a plain ground; you may be a forest; you may be
       a dale or a vale; when reighteous men live on You, you are
       righteous too [5] ." In her effusion embodied in these lines the
       poetess emphasises on the truth that a land has no significance or
       meaning of its own unless it is peopled by men possessing unsullied
       morality, character and action.
       We shall now see what Tolkāppiyar has to say about womanhood in his
       famous grammar. He states that a woman is guarded by the three
       great feminine virtues, “Accam." “Nanam” and “Madam [6] ." A
       woman's innate fear of hurt to her modesty is “Accam", Coyness and
       dissociation with anything that is incompatiable with womanhood is
       “Nānam,” and feigning ignorance even though a woman may be a
       repository of learning is “Madam."
       Tolkāppiyar further credits the womanhood with the virtues of
       Self-restraint, mental peace, uprightness, uttering only purposeful
       words, discrimination between good and evil, and unfathomable mind
       [7]. The grammarian defines the term "Mādhar" as love [8] leaving
       us to infer that women are to be the objects of love. The norm that
       he sets for the conduct of women is, that sense of shame is
       superior to her love for her own life, and chastity, in its turn,
       surpasses the sense of shame in value [9] . At the same time he
       prescribes that fear of censure and sin and acquisition of
       knowledge are masculine virtues [10] .
       A woman gifted with fascinating beauty of form, and the loveliness
       and charm attractive to males, was called Karikai". Women endowed
       with sufficient graces to win the iove of men were called “Mädhar”.
       Women who were pleasurable to all the five senses were said to
       possese “Sayal”. This particular characteristic of woman was
       capable of undoing the heroism of a man, according to a verse in
       Kuruntokai,[11] “ In this verse a woman's softness and grace is
       compared to water, and the might of man to fire. Because women
       possessed softness and grace, they were called “Melliyalār" (frail
       persons). But women are endowed with enough strength and stamina to
       control their mind, keep it well balanced, and shun evil ways.
       THE LOVELINESS OF FEMALE FORM
       Women possessed liquid charms,[12] the swaying gait of a
       peacock,[13] and a physical body endowed with tenderness,[14]“
       natural fragrance [15] and susceptibility to sallowness due to Iove
       Ianguishes [16].
       Women possessed soft flowerlike eyes, arms comparable to round
       bamboo pieces and fascinating foreheads curved and shining like the
       moon a few days young [17].
       I invite you to an eyeful feast of feminine charms provided by a
       song in Kalittokai. Therein, the lover extols the beauty of his
       lady-love as follows. "'O my love! you have arms like rounded
       bamboos; you have done your fragrant hair into five thrilling
       styles; your frightened look puts a fawn to shame; you have the
       gait of a peacock. The pebbles of your anklets tingling, the jewels
       you are wearing shedding their brilliance, do go to me swaying like
       a frail creeper, flitting like a streak of lightning and shining
       like a goddess. I stole a look at your waist so insubstantial as to
       be invisible to my eyes. In the city of wealty and affluence
       belonging to your father you have thrown your ball, with the throb
       of a youth, and have followed it here". [18]
       The physical charms of his lady-love were sure to kindle the fire
       of love in the heart of the lover. Tolkāppiyar has prescribed ten
       dispositions that should exist between the young lovers. They are:
       Aptness in birth, status, virtues, conduct, knowledge, age,
       physical charm, manifestation of love-attainment of knowledge and
       wealth. [19]
       Fascinating beauty of form causes the birth of the feeling of love
       between the lovers. Tolkāppiyar, speaks of lovers possessing apt
       characteristics [20] . In Poruliyal, Ilampuranar comments that
       these charms lead to their ultimate union.
       The life time of a woman can be broadly divided into two periods.
       The first period relates to the life she leads with her parents up
       to her marriage, and the second is that she spends with her
       husband.
       LIFE OF A WOMAN BEFORE THE MARRIAGE
       There is ample proof in Sangam literature to the fact that heroism
       in war had been the chief characteristics in men. Ponmugiyār, a
       Sangam poetess sings that a young man should find it his prime duty
       to destroy the enemy elephants on the battle-field and to return
       home victoriously [21]. Another verse in Purand giru refers to the
       masculine virtue that a man was born to fight on the battle-field
       [22].” It speaks of yet another virtue, that he should surpass on
       the battle-field [23].
       As contrasted with these male characteristics, a woman was expected
       to be loving and graceous. The Tamil Community anxiously developed
       such a womanhood. An Ainkurunuru song bears evidence to this fact.
       It is a composition by Kapilar, a Brahman of unsullied character
       [24]. He has been praised for his morals even by his
       contemporaries, themselves [25]. In this song Kapilar says that the
       chief of the hilly country prayed to God and begged for a daughter
       [26]. . It is an incontrovertible proof that during the Sangam
       period people had welcomed baby girls. The Modern Tamils feel it a
       great burden to bear and bring up female children. “What a
       contrast, gentleman! How far we have fallen from our ancient
       ideals!"
       THE SPORTS OF YOUNG GIRLS
       The Sports of young girls in the ancient Tamil society conformed to
       their tender age and limited capacity. They plucked flowers,
       plunged in tanks and rivers, rocked in swings, threw balls, built
       sand-houses, and played with small balls in games like “Ammānai."
       The Kurinji girls drove away the birds that infested the Tinai
       fields with “Tattais.” They knew how to string. beautiful flower
       garlands too.[27] Kapilar mentions 99 varieties of flowers in
       Kuriñjippattu.
       The young women were never melancholic; were always cheerful, were
       romping and lively. The little groups of girls indulging in sports
       and amusements were called “Ᾱyam" or "Orai Ᾱyam." A Narrinai poet
       speaks disparagingly of girls who sulked in their houses without
       mingling with their companions in play and amusements. He says that
       sulking is not a correct conduct, and it will ruin their health. In
       his composition the maid-companion invites the lady-love to go with
       her and plunge in the milky, bubbling freshes of the river. [28]
       Young ladies made dolls of a kind of kōrai grass and played with
       them [29] Dolls were also made of pollin dust. [30] An innocent
       little girl suckles her doll with her immature breast. [31] The
       lady-love builds a toy house with her toy vessels and dolls. [32]
       There is yet another maid who, along with her girlfriends, decks
       herself with a variety of jewels and engages herself in the
       performance of 'Tai Nōnbu" praying to be blessed with a suitable
       husband. [33]" A little girl goes house to house singing, and
       distributes to the immates whatever gifts she had got from others.
       [34]
       The Neytal girls frolic with the crabs on the sea-shore; [35]
       beatrice in the wooden mortars with pestles and string garlands of
       Valli flowers. [36]
       Ancient Tamil families, some of them, appear to have been so very
       affluent that the girls played with golden-balls standing on the
       sand-dunes. [37] Some girls played throwballs with Molucca beans.
       [38]
       The Tamil girls appear to have had a fascination for plunging in
       beautiful streams. [39]
       EDUCATION OF GIRLS
       The girls of the Sangam age were given a good training in
       literature, music and drama. The Sangam literature bears ample
       evidence to the fact that many women had distinguished themselves
       in the art of music. The education received by women was different
       from that imparted to men. Young men were taught the art of
       warfare, the ambassodorial assignments, town policing and various
       professions for earning a living. On the other hand the girls were
       given a good training in domestic science, to use the modern term.
       Even the mother liked only her educated son. Puranānūru says that a
       king followed the path prescribed by men of wisdom. [40]
       The education imparted to the young men of the Sangam age was well
       designed to promote their physical health, balanced growth, and to
       fit them to their married life to follow. The girls got their
       instructions on the maintenance of their house-hold from their
       foster-mothers and lady companions (the daughters of
       foster-mothers).[41]
       The companion sits on the same side of the boat where the lady-love
       sits; and follows her during her sports in water. [42]
       The preliminary instruction, a girl receives from her lady-friend
       and foster-mother blossoms into a full fledged knowledge in Iyal,
       Isai and Nāṭakam, even before she outgrows her adolescence. [43]
       Such a girl was called “Mudukkuraivi." In Cilappatikāram, Kannaki
       is hailed as a “Mudukkuraivi. [44]
       More than fifty women have been ranked among the Sangam poets.
       Outstanding among the poetesses were: Añji Attai Makaļ Nakaiyār,
       Allur Nan Mullaiyār, Ᾱdi mandiyār, Uttiyār, Unpittaiyār, Okkūr
       Māsāttiyār, Avvaiyār, Nannākaiyār, Kākkaippātiniyār, Nachellaiyār,
       Kāvarpendu, Kuramaka! Ilaveyiņiyår Nakkaņņaiyār, Nettimaiyār,
       Nețumpalliyattai, Pāri Makalir, Pünkan Uttiraiyār, Būdappāņdiyan
       Dēvi, Peruňkõppeņdu, Pēymakaļ llaveyiņi, Pottiyār,
       Põndaippasalaiyār, Mārokkattu Nappasalaiyar, Varumulaiyāritti,
       Veņņikkuyatttiyār, Vellividiyār, Veri pâtiya Kāmākkaņņiyār.
       Of the above women poets Avvaiyar outshines as the most
       distinguished, one who could tender sage counsel even to mighty
       monarchs. Kākkaippaṭiniyār has contributed two works on prosody
       namely, Kākkaippatiniyam, and Sirukakkaippadi ṇiyam, The most
       equisite and soul-stirring pieces contributed by the Tamil
       poetesses of Sangam period have been praised as the repositories of
       poetic excellence and fertile wisdom.
       WOMEN'S KNOWLEDGE OF MUSIC
       By nature women were soft and tender, and their tone was sweet.
       They nursed the art of music as they nursed their babies, singing
       them lullaby songs. Even the beasts of the forests were charmed by
       the music of women. In one of the Sangam poems an interesting
       episode is related, A ‘Kurava' girl sang the 'Kuriṇci-p-pan," a
       melody native to the Kuriñci tract, so sweetly, that an elephant,
       which came to forage the well ripe ears of Thinai corn, was
       fascinated by the music and fell into slumber. [45]
       When women sang the Pālai-p-pan, even the cruel hearts of the
       Maravars of the Palai tract melted, and the hunting weapons slipped
       from their hands. [46]
       It was not unusual for women to sing sweetly into the ears of their
       husbands and nurse their war wounds. [47]
       Malaipatukatām, one of the ten idylls, contains reference to such
       instances. [48]
       GIRLS PRACTISING DRAMA
       Dancing is an art in which the participants could express by
       physical signs the emotions which surge through their hearts. The
       ancient Tamil women were well versed in this art too. A dancer who
       knew the art of physically expressing her emotions (Viral) was
       called a Virali. Malaipatukatām gives a graphic account of the
       accomplished Viralis who could dance to the mellow tunes of Yāl.
       We shall now pass on to consider the life of women led subsequent
       to their marriage.
       A little girl and a boy would have been quarelling with one another
       and would have pulled each other's hair even though their
       foster-mother tired to stop them. But later when these children
       grew up, and blossomed into youth, their hearts got locked up in
       love, and they appeared like beautiful twin garlands. They marry
       and lead a happy life. Here, in the lives of these young persons.
       we see the fingers of fate moving. Those who have observed the life
       of this happy couple have blessed the “fate” for its contribution
       to their falicity. The entire drama is embodied in a short song by
       Mötāsanār.49" The stage setting now turns. We now witness a
       different drama. A young man and a girl meet together for the first
       time. Till this happy and accidental meeting they were strangers;
       yet they fall in love with one another. The lover addresses his
       lady-love in these words : “Your mother and father and my mother
       and father are not relatives at all. Till this moment we too have
       not seen each other. The showers fall from the skies and mix with
       the red soil they soak into. Similarly we have now become
       inseparable ones.” [50]
       In the ancient Tamilagam, in most cases a short period of love
       preceded marriage. A girl would like to marry only the youngman
       whom she cared for. To achieve this purpose she would pray to her
       God offering Him flowers and incense. Poet Kapilar in one of his
       songs included in Ainkurunῡru paints a beautiful picture of such a
       girl. [51]”
       GIRLS WHO OFFERED THEIR HEARTS TO THE WINNERS IN BULL FIGHTS
       Young women born of Mullai tract would like to marry only those
       heroes who came out successful in bull fighting games. They never
       dream of marrying a coward who was afraid of the games.52 Girls of
       long beautiful tresses could be won only by the heroes who had
       over-mastered the bull. [53] From these internal evidences we have
       to infer that bullfighting and success in the fierce game was a
       condition precedent to a match between a young man and a young
       women of the Mullai tract.
       In the ancient Tamil Society a huge amount was offered by the
       bridegroom's party for purchase of jewels for the embellishment of
       the bride. But a father would never agree to give his daughter in
       marriage to a young man, even though he had brought out very large
       gifts of wealth, if only he was otherwise ineligible to her hand.
       [54]
       When once a lady-love elected to marry a youngman, she accepted him
       as her lord finally, and never rejects him later. A lady-love who
       had lost her heart to her lover feigns to be carried only away by
       fresh floods while she was sporting in the river along wirh her
       maid friends. The lover who, she know was in the vicinity, plunged
       in the stream, caught hold of the girl, hugged her to his bosom,
       and rescued her from her danger. Her parents and villagers decided
       to marry them, because their physical bodies united in contact, as
       did their hearts already. The maid friends of the lady love wonders
       how, at the apt moment, the lady could have called for rains at her
       command to bring freshes in the river. [55] " In this context I am
       tempted to bring to your attention a parallel ideal embodied by
       Tiruvalluvar In his famous, oft quoted Kural, “The Lady who
       worships no God but her husband could bid even untimely rains to
       fall [56].” As the Kuriṅci girls marry only the suitor of their
       choice rains came in abundance and in time. And the Kuriñci men had
       plenty of game for their food. What more; because of the chastity
       of the girls who worshipped no God than their husband, even her
       brothers could aim some arrows at their targets. [57]”
       The girls of Mullai tract also follow those of the Kuriñci girls in
       the practice of this matrimonial virtue. The Neytal girls do not
       lag behind in these high morals. A Mullai girl can never think of
       marrying anyone other than her lover, even though she could have
       the world offered to her as prize. [58]”
       A Kuriñci lady-love decked her dark hair with the little string of
       flowers offered by her lover, but she is afraid of her mother and
       her reproach. Her lady companion - comforts her by these words:
       “He is the son of a shepherd; you are the daughter of a shepherd.
       You love him. Now where is the question for your mother rebuking
       you for the act? The heart of your mother is similar to yours, be
       assured. [59]"
       A poet of Küruntokai has also confirmed in one of his verses the
       existence of the practice of love marriages, and none of other
       among the ancient Tamils. [60]
       TOLKAPPIYAR’S REMARKS ON THE VIRTUES OF WEDDED WOMEN
       Tolkāppiyar says that the transcendent virtue of a married women
       consisted of chastity, love, feminine patience, strength of mind,
       anxiety to entertain guests, love and generosity to relatives and
       many other good traits.[61]
       The lady is the King-pin to the chariot of wedded life. The word
       “Illal" in Tamil means “the governor of a house hold." The term
       “Manaivi" and “Manai Mutal” also denote a wife.
       Bhāratiyār would like women to afford her fullest sympathy and
       co-operation to all the household functions and charity of her
       husband. [62]*
       A woman who has united herself with her husband in ties of
       everlasting love is called “A woman of unswerving chastity” (orumai
       makaḷir) [63] and “life's companion” (vāḻkkaittuṇai) [64] by
       Tiruvalluvar.
       The maid-companion informs the lover of the lady-love that even at
       the moment she met him for the first time she had mentally accepted
       him as her wedded lord and had been behaving as his wife. [65]
       According to the first commentator of Ainkurunῡru chastity does not
       commence with the marriage ceremonies but exists even during the
       period of courtship. [66]. He avers that the lady commenced her
       wedded life even from the moment she fell in love with her lord.
       Dr. V. Sp. Manickam has explained that “Karaṇam" or “Cataṇku"
       represents the stage in which a girl gave up her virginity and
       entered into wedlock. [67], We have to presume that it was the
       occasion when the girl was given away in marriage to her lover
       [68].
       But the force of true love is as strong as destiny than, as it is
       now. When the lovers met with obstruction to their cause of love
       from their parents they could elope and marry clandestinely. 69"
       According to Tolkāppiyar marriage ceremonies had to be introduced
       later when, by passage of time, morals became loose. [70] " On this
       statement of the grammarian I|ampῡranar comments thus : “Falsehood
       and loose morals appeared only after the deluge; during the period
       before the deluge, married life commenced without any open
       ceremony; and, after the deluge, marriage rites had to be
       introduced. [71]"
       Gentlemen ! Now I shall examine what were the characteristics and
       duties enjoined upon married life by the Tamils of the Sangam
       period.
       Chastity : The term “Karpu” has been defined variously. According
       to one definition, “Karpu" denotes the path laid by her husband
       which a woman should follow in her married life. Some explain the
       term as “possessing the rocky strength of a moral purpose.” “Nanam"
       is superior to one's life, and chastity surpasses "Nänam" in
       value-says Tolkāppiyar.[72]
       Tiruvalluvar raises a mighty question, “what is more transcendent
       for a wife than the possession of stable chastity? [73]” The
       immortal author of Silappatikāram remarks through the mouth of
       Kavunthi Adikal that chastity is an absolute necessity for women,
       and Kannaki is the only Goddess on earth possessing the mighty
       virtue and none-else.[74]
       Love : Then we shall see what Iove meant to the ancient Tamil
       girls. Love is possession of a heart filled with an undying
       affection toward the lover. “The world cannot sustain without
       water. [75]. My lord knows that, without him. I cannot live"—Wails
       a Naṟṟinai woman. Tiruvalluvar represents a lover as remarking that
       the relationship between him and his loved one is comparable to the
       relation between body and soul.[76]"
       The royal poet Peruńkaṭurkö, who sang on Pālai tract asserts that,
       while exercise of a profession was the life of a man, to a woman,
       in her wedded life, her husband was her |ife. [77]
       ΝΟΒΙLΙΤΥ ΟF ΒΙRΤΗ
       Character is behaving in conformity with the canons of right
       conduct prescribed for observance.
       The husband of a lady who had been sporting with a harlot for some
       days wanted to resume to the company of his wife after sometime,
       and sent a Pānan as a messenger to negotiate peace with her [78].
       But the lady refused her husband entry into the household stating
       that she was not angry with him, but he was only eligible to be
       respected as her lord, and not share her amorous company.[79].
       Another lady, whose husband returned to her after a few days stay
       with a harlot, said thus: “‘my husband's cruelty is unbearable. But
       I have to yield to him because I am born of a virtuous family
       [80].” We see how much, nobility of birth is valued by the lady. A
       woman did not fear death, but, she was afraid, that, if she died
       she would lose the company of her lord. [81]" Another lady tells
       that even in the next birth the same must be her husband. [82]
       When Kövalan abandoned Mādhavi and returned to the arms of her
       wife, Kannaki, and regretted his conduct toward her, she remarked
       “you had been leading a life of moral turpitude condemned by men of
       wisdom. But, I am a woman of immutable fidelity. Hence when you
       announced your wish to go to Madurai to eke out a living agreed to
       accompany you to that city. [83]"
       A woman of virtue could not restrain her husband from pursuing
       loose morals, nor could she forsake him for it. She would be always
       faithful to him. [84"
       Here is a picture painted by Bödhaṉār-the picture of a girl, who
       had miserable turns in her fortunes in life, but still stuck on to
       the nobility of her character and birth. She was the child of rich
       parents. As a little child, she was offered food with milk in a
       golden cup by her foster-mothers, but would not eat, and giving
       them slip, hid herself under flower creepers. She grew up to
       maidenhood and loved and married. But, unfortunately, her husband
       fell into wants, and could not afford to provide a square meal to
       his wife. The father of the lady learnt of the plight of his
       daughter, and sent her sumptuous food from his own house. But the
       noble birth of the lady would not permit her to accept the dole.
       She elected to lead a life of poverty, denying herself alternate
       meals. [85]" The long carridor of time now vanishes before our
       eyes. A domestic scene, painted by the poet two thousand years
       back, stands out in glare; and brings tears to our eyes. ¨
       Here is another word-picture painted by another Sangam poet. A
       young lady finds the water in the well in her husbands place, in
       which leaves rotted and animals drank, sweeter than a mixture of
       milk and honey in the garden of her birth place. [86]
       ΡΑΤΙΕΝCΕ
       Forbearance is a virtue that springs from a tender heart.
       Tiruvalluvar rules that it is the prime duty of a person to put up
       with the taunts of others, just as the earth supports even those
       who dug deep into it. [87]" There is a separate chapter allotted in
       Tirukkural emphassing on the necessity of cultivating this supreme
       virtue. We could easily find that this virtue manifests itself in
       women, more than in men.
       Even while the mother beats her child it cries “Ammā, Ammā."
       Similarly a lady will always yearn for the graces of her lover even
       though he might indulge in acts of cruelty toward her.[88]"
       Konkuvēlir, the famous author of Peruńkatai, the epic on which I am
       now carrying on my research, says that one born as a woman should
       put up patiently with the wrong doings of her husband that might
       even hurt her. [89]”
       The late poet Kambar describes in his own inimitable style the
       virtues of Sita. He says that the heroine of the great Kavya bore
       the characteristics of noble birth, and was the mainstay of
       patience and an embellishment of chastity. [90]"
       A later-day Avvaiyār advises woman to afford her husband a mother's
       protection, the services of a maid, the charms of Goddess Lakshmi,
       the embraces of a harlot, the counsels of a minister and the
       patience of earth.[91]
       NaIaṭiyär, an eminent vvork on didactics included in the
       Patiṉeṉkilkka*ṇakku anthology contains a poem in which certain rare
       virtues of a woman are counted. A woman should be fascinating to
       her husband, should act according to his restraint, and should
       learn when to indulge in petty quarrels with her husband, and, when
       to compose the differences [92]
       FIRM ADHERENCE TO A LIFE OF CHASTITY
       Nacchinārkkiniyar, the eminent commentator of Tolkāppiyam defines
       “Nirai" (unswerving adherence to life of chastity) as the virtue of
       not exposing to others, the troubles and travails a woman may be
       undergoing [93].”
       A lady might be aware of the loose morals of her husband and the
       mental cruelty afflicted to her by him, yet, she would patiently
       bear with him, [94] and would not reveal his lapses and her
       troubles even to her maid [95]. Such was the high degree of
       chastity of the ancient woman of the Tamil society.
       ENTERTAINING GUESTS
       The arrangement of chapters in the ''Illara Iyal” in Tirukkural has
       a meaning and a purpose. It is not a haphazard setting. In the
       first chapter Tiruvalluvar defines Iife of a householder; in the
       next, he details with the virtues of the lifelong companion, the
       wife; in the next he extols the duty of giving birth intelligent
       and useful children; in the next chapter he deals with the love one
       should feel for other human beings; ultimately he emphasises on the
       duty of a house holder to receive and entertain guests cordially.
       Tolkāppiyar has included entertainment of guests as one of the
       virtues of mistress of the household. He has defined “Viruntu" as
       "a thing that is quite new". [96].
       The author of Silappatikāram has enjoined entertainment of guests
       as one of the important domestic duties of a person [97]. Kannaki
       bemoans the fate that had overtaken her on being abandoned by
       Kövalan in these words: “Alas! I have lost, in my life, the rare
       opportunity of giving gifts to men of wisdom, Anthanars, ascetics,
       and entertaining guests...." [98]
       Sita laments while at Lanka, that what could her husband do without
       her when he had guests to entertain. [99]
       The women of Sangam period would be very much happy to receive
       guests even at the untimely hours in the night.[100]
       A lady calls the main gate of her house as “Palar puku Väyil" (that
       is the door through which many used to enter).[101]
       It was an admirable custom in those days to let in all the guests
       for the night, call out if there was any one left out, and then
       close the gate.[102]
       Households have been glorified as places of inexhaustible resources
       wherein any one could get at any time a warm reception, and even a
       world of guests can find food and entertainment.[103]
       The petty quarrels between the lord of the house and his wife used
       to be made up briefly in the presence of a guest.104
       I need not tell you that, even today, the guests often *times serve
       a similar purpose and sometimes the other way also.
       Cherishing of relatives
       Nacchinārkkiniyar comments on what is to be cherished of relatives.
       The householder should first see that his friends, relatives,
       beasts of burden, men bearing weapons of war have had their food,
       and, then only he should proceed to satisfy his hunger. [105]
       A girl was first trained to cook tasty food for her husband. A
       foster mother who happened to witness her daughter newly wed,
       feeding her husband, reported to the lady's mother as follows: “The
       girl crushed curds with her tender petal like fingers, spiced it
       with fried mustard seeds, the smoke from the spoon irritating her
       dark eyes, wiped her fingers on the cloth and forgot to wash the
       saree, served the dainty dish to her husband, and enjoyed her
       husband's words of praise for the delicacy.” [106]
       Bharatidasan also describes a similar scene in one of his poems
       [107]. Kamban says that Sita Devi was cursing her fate with remorse
       that as she was being a captive in Lanka she could not provide her
       dear husband with tasty food [108].
       The lover would tell his loved one that even if she served him
       poison, it would be nectar to him, [109] A lady-companion recalls
       the endearing words of the lover spoke to his loved" one before
       marriage. He praised the margosa fruits given to him by his loved
       one as sheer delicacies made of jiggery [110]. A later composition,
       Tiruvengaikkövai, also contains an allusion to a similar sweet and
       endearing comment of a husband [111].
       ΤΗΕ ΗΕRΟΙSΜ ΟΡ ΤΑΜΙL WΟΜΕΝ
       The heroism of women is called "Mῡdin Mullai" in Purapporul
       Grammar. Women born of families dedicated to defence of their
       country were also called "Mῡdin Makalir". We find from Puṟanāṉṟu
       interesting evidences regarding the extraordinery valour and
       intrepedity displayed by women during times of war. A brave woman
       had the misfortune of losing her elder brother and husband on the
       battle field. She had only a young male child left to her. She
       called him, dressed him in white, dressed his tuft, put a lance in
       his hand and directed him toward the battle field. It is to be
       noted here that the famous poet who has given an account of this
       dauntless act of a Tamil mother is none other than
       OkkῡrMāsāththiyār, a woman poet. [112]
       WΟΜΕΝ, ΤΗΕ LIGΗΤ ΟF ΗΟΜΕ
       Women have been glorified in Tamil literature as tha "lamp of
       home". [113] “A young woman sheds lustre to a home” says
       Nānmani-k-kadikai [114]. It also negatively lays down that “A home
       is a void without a woman to run it." [115] Tiruvalluvar has stated
       that a man whose wife could not save the honour of her home could
       not walk boldly like a bull before his enemies. [116] A wife
       possessing all feminine virtues and homely cultures is an asset to
       a family.[117] An accomplished wife illumines a home. [118] A poem
       in Pālai-kkali contains in a nut-shell the philosophy of married
       life. It says that the husband and wife may be so indigent as to
       wear only a single piece of cloth and not a shred more, but they
       should live a united, inseparable life [120] In Sangam literature
       we could find a young man and his wife leading a life of love and
       affection, being called “A bird with two heads and one soul.” [121]
       WΟΜΕΝ ΑΝD WΟRSΗΙΡ ΟF GΟD
       Women of the Sangam period were devoted to God, and spent
       considerable time at home in worshipping Him.
       Young virgins would go to Lord Murugan. They had already met their
       lovers in dreams. They now supplicated to Him to bring them and
       their lovers together in marriage in reality. Married women entreat
       the deity for blessing them with good children. Some lift their
       hands to Murugan to protect their husband in the exercise of his
       profession and also to bless him to meet with victory on the battle
       field.[122]
       Married women offered worship to Siva, Māyōn, Murugan and other
       Gods. Ladies would hug their little ones to their bosoms, as they
       would the lotus blossoms, and would go to the temples along with
       their husbands carrying the Puja offerings like flowers and
       incense.[123]
       The love, women cherished for their lords, was larger than the
       world, loftier than the skies and deeper than the seas.[124] A
       Sangam poet called “Tῡṅkalōri" has all admiration for a girl after
       whose marriage to a youngman, his poverty-stricken home began to
       fill with plenty and the family grew prosperous and happy.[125]
       The hair of a person has not turned grey despite his advanced
       years. To inquisitive questioners, he discloses that the secret of
       his youth was his cultured and devoted Wife at home.[126]
       A loving wife would naturally disdain to prolong her life after her
       husband's death. Tiruvalluvar takes us to the bed chamber of a
       young couple where delicate drama is enacted. The husband promises
       not to leave her in the present birth. At once tears stream in the
       eyes of his wife. She cries, because she fears that she might get
       separated from in the future births [127]. Such was the great
       affection women possessed for their husbands.
       Suttee was not widely prevalent in ancient Tamilagam. In some cases
       women committs suttee on the death of their husbands.
       Peruñkōppendu, the wife of Bhūda-p-pāṇḍiyan wanted to die on the
       funeral pyre of her husband. Men of wisdom around her entreated her
       to give up her decision. She refused to comply with their request
       and addressed them in these words: “O men of Wisdom! You ask me not
       to follow my husband but to live. You are wise but you have hurt
       me. You want me to eat rice mixed with Seasamum seeds and Vēlai
       greens cooked with tamarind; you want me to sleep on hard, pebbled
       floor. Be assumed that I am not such a mean woman to live
       performing the “Kaimmai Nōnbu.” (widowhood.) The funeral pyre may
       be frightening to you. But to me, you should know, it appears as
       cool as a beautiful lotus pond. [128]
       A woman very intensely in love with her husband, died immediately
       she heard of his demise. This was considered to be top class
       chastity. Some women burnt themselves to death along with the
       remains of their husbands Their affection was considered to be of
       the second sort. Many women chose to lead a life of widow with all
       the sufferings it entailed. Their affection was considered to be of
       the lowest. This information is furnished by Manimēkalai[129], an
       epic belonged to a later period.
       Kōperundevi, who died the moment she saw her husband roll to his
       death, belongs to the first category. Bhuāda-pāndiyan’s wife, who
       died on the funeral pyre of her husband, falls into the second
       category. Women who live widowed life relate to the lowest category
       of women.
       .
       The relationship that existed between a husband and wife is
       extraordinary and unique. To chaste women none can be compared to
       her husband.[130] Therefore, Köpperundevi left the mundane world
       along with her lord. The ancient Tamils raised monuments over the
       remains of women who committed suttee.[131] We have various
       instances of women dying on the funeral pyre of their husband in
       Puranānūru.[132] Ay Andiran died. His wives died with him.[133]
       The practice of committing suttee has continued during the medieval
       times according to the archaeological evidence.
       The father of Tirunavukkarasu Nāyanār died, and his mother at once
       committed suttee.[134]
       Sundara Cholan Parāntakan II (957-970) died. According to the
       information contained in the Tiruvalańkādu copper plates his queen
       Vănavan-Mā-Déviyar committed Suttee.[135] Similarly Viramā Devi,
       the queen of Kulothunga I committed herself to the flames that
       engulfed her husband's body.”[136]
       Women who chose to lead a widow's life were called “A lil Pendir.”
       (That is, they have no proper persons to protect them.)[137]. These
       widows earned their livehhood by spinning. Hence they were called
       “Paruththippendir" (Cotton women). [138]
       As the widows removed their jewels they were called "Kali Kala
       Maka!ir" (kaḻi kala makaḷir).[139]. They also tonsured their heads.
       This practice appears to have been widely prevalent in many
       countries of the world in the olden days.[140] Western scholars are
       of the opinion that women cut off their hair to add to the strength
       to the departed.
       Sir J. G. Fraser, while discussing the reason for shearing of locks
       as an offering for the dead, says “still it is to be remembered
       that in the opinion of some people, the hair is the special seat of
       its owner's strength, and that accordingly in cutting their hair
       and presenting it to the dead they may have imagined that they were
       supplying him with a source of energy not less ample and certain
       than when they provided with their blood to drink". [141] (Folk
       tales in the old Testament, P. IV. Ch. iv. p. 397).
       The old Testament says that "virtuous woman is a crown to her
       husband".[142]
       Gentlemen and Ladies! in concluding for the day I may say that the
       ancient Tamil woman was considered the loved one for her husband in
       early days, in the middle age his lifes companion, and his nurse in
       old age.[143]
       The English poet Pope says:
       **All other goods by Fortune's hands are given,
       A wife is the peculiar gift of heaven".[144]
       Another Poet Otwayn exclaims in raptures thus: “O woman, lovely
       woman, nature made thee to temper men, we had been brutes without
       you". [145]
       There is a verse in the New Testament that says “giving honour unto
       the wife as unto the Weaker vessel". [146]
       The love of the husband toward his wife must be sustained and ever
       tender. There should be no paucity in its course at all.
       Tiruvalluvar says that a husbandman should be continuously
       supervising his lands. Otherwise it will yield no return. He
       compares this attention and care to that he must bestow on his
       wife. [147].
       He would consider no wealth superior to the acquisition of a good
       wife.[148]
       Ingersoll thinks that if only a person would occupy woman's heart
       as her emperor, and if only she sits in his heart as his empress,
       he can be content to die a beggar in a gutter.
       The greatest bliss on the world is life of love and union of heart
       on the part of a husband and wife.[149]
       Ladies and Gentlemen, with this I conclude my today's lecture.
       Thank you for your patiently bearing with me.
       Tomorrow, I shall be discussing the position of women and their
       status in detail during the glorious Sangam Age.
       -------------------------------
       Lecture II
       Revered President, learned Colleagues, Ladies and gentlemen and my
       young friends!
       My yesterday's talk dealt with the characteristics virtues and the
       degree of culture attained by the womanhood of ancient Tamilagam.
       We have seen, how women were equipped culturally to fit themelves
       into the vicissitudes of life that confronted them in their youth,
       in their adult age, and in their old age
       In today's talk | propose to discuss the high status and position
       they had occupied in the ancient Tamilagam.
       It has been generally agreed to, by the scholars all over the world
       that the Tamil society is one of the most ancient societies in the
       world. Scholars who have given a shape to the Lemurian theory have
       always maintained that the present territorial portion of South
       India, and, a long stretch of land to the South of it, which
       submerged under deluges thousands of years back, have been the
       cradle of human civilisation. Father Heras has been maintaining
       that the civilisation of the Dravidians had dawned long long back,
       and that the civilisation, that prevailed in the Indo-Gangetic
       plain seven thousand years back, was definitely that of the
       Dravidlans. He says that “being Dravidians, the inhabitants of
       Mohenjo baro and Northern India naturally spoke a Dravidian
       language.” [1] Purapporul venpä Mālai, a latter composition exults
       the fact that the Tamil Community was born “when rocks appeared on
       the face of the earth and sand was not yet formed.” [2] It is such
       an ancient ore. In this context it will be interesting to consider
       that, of all the women belonging to the ancient civilisation all
       the world over, the Tamil women had been enjoying certain higher
       status, privileges and freedom in life. Thiru V. Kanakasabai Pillai
       says in his pioneer book “Tamils one thousand eight hundred years
       ago.” that the Tamil women “mixed freely, though modestly, in the
       business and a musements of social life.”[3] Thiru K. A. Nilakanta
       Sastri has remarked in his book “The History of the Tamils and
       their Culture” that women of the ancient Tamilagam enjoyed
       considerable privileges, and that may
       many poetesses distinguished themselves in the literary field.[4]
       Thiru. V. Kalyanasundaranar, who was one of the heralds in Tamil
       Nadu to have raised the standard of independence of women early in
       this century, says: "It is not an exaggeration to assert that the
       ancient Tamilagam was a symbol of independent womanhood. This fact
       can be substantiated by any amount of evidence collected from the
       ancient Sangam works. None, in those days, felt that woman was
       inferior, less equipped, and a slave to man. What is it that stands
       in relief in all the Sangam Works? Is it not the pleasure of home?
       How can there be enjoyment when there is no independence? The very
       manifestation of independence is nothing but pleasure. The lover
       and his loved-one should have been equally placed in their
       enjoyment of domestic pleasure. There were no disparities of any
       sort between them. Both of them enjoyed equal privileges and equal
       status. The characteristics and accomplishments of both the lover
       and his loved-one should be balanced and matched. According to
       Nachinārkkiniyar the lover and the loved-one should function as the
       pair of horns adorning the head of a cow. The ancient Tamils
       practised love marriages. The very fact that a girl could select
       her own lord is a proof positive for the large amount of freedom
       enjoyed by women."[5]
       Prof. M. Varadarajanar, the Vice chancellor of Madurai University
       writes in his book “Penmai Välka” (peṇmai vāḻka), as follows:-
       “During the period called **Sangam Age"—that is the period prior
       the 2nd Century A. D. Tamil Nadu had attained a very high status in
       political, social and commercial spheres. A study of the literature
       of those days would amply prove that the women enjoyed a good deal
       of esteem and respect. More than thirty women poets have flourished
       at various times in the ancient Tamilagam. There have been
       poetesses like Avvaiyār who had the privilege of being employed on
       ambassodorial duties- Royal Ladies like the wife of
       Bhūda-p-pāndiyan were erudite scholars. Women well accomplished in
       the acts of music and drama have been living in every town. In many
       other fields women distinguished along with men to a considerable
       degree” [6].
       Dr. V. Sp. Manickam who has made a special study of the condition
       of women of Sangam period, emphasises that “The woman of the
       ancient Tamil Society had the privilege to seek for educational
       equipments, to compose poems, to love and marry, to rebuke her
       lover, to pursue her domestic functions without any hindrance and
       to command a status in all these equal to men.” [7]
       Dr. K. K. Pillay has observed in his “Social history of the
       Tamils:-Vol. 1 —that “women were treated with consideration in view
       of their comparatively weaker physical capacity and power of
       resistance.” [8]
       Dr. N. Subramaniyam declares that “the position of women of Sangam
       age was not as it is today; and at the same time, it was not widely
       different from the one as it obtains today.” [9] In one of his
       articles he further states that “the Sangam Society from the point
       of view of the sexes, was not an egalitarian Society, and the men
       granted a markedly inferior status to their women, who consciously
       or by habit accepted that position. There was no contemporary
       demand for a revision of that status on philosophical or even
       practical grounds, and, till recently, that position has remained
       without appreciable change,”[10]
       Jawaharlal Nehru, remarks in his “Discovery of India" as follows:
       “The legal position of women according to Manu, the earliest
       exponent of the law, was definitely bad. They were always dependent
       on somebody-on the father, the husband or the son. They were
       treated in law almost as chattels. And yet from the numerous
       instances in the Epics this law was not applied very rigidly and
       they held an place in the home and in society. Bad as the legal
       position of women was in ancient India, judged by modern standards,
       it was far better than in ancient Greece, and Rome; in early
       Christianity, in the canon law of medieval Europe; and, indeed,
       right up to comparatively modern times at the beginning of the
       nineteenth century.”[11]
       Thirumathi K. Gnanambal states in her book on ''Home life among the
       Tamils in the Sangam Age" that “woman is the fountain head of love.
       She was free, independent and the equal of man, and she was treated
       with uniform courtesy and respect. She was not a mere household
       beast of burden. She was indispensable and the vital half of man.
       She was held in reverence and adoration in the Tamil Land of the
       Sangam Age.”[12]
       We shall now see how far the remarks of the scholars and historians
       quoted above are supported by Sangam classics.
       Yesterday, we saw how the lover and his loved-one should agree in
       birth, nobility, capacity, age, personal charms, affection,
       humility, grace, wisdom and wealth.[13] The couple who possesses
       all these ten characteristics are called by Tolkāppiyanār “Oththa
       kilavan and kilaththi” (otta kiḻavaṉum kiḻattiyum)[14]
       .
       The degree of civilisation a society has attained can be very well
       understood from the words of the language spoken. Language never
       lets down a civilisation.
       It is a peculiar excellence and sublimity of the Tamil language
       that the words “talaivaṉ - talaivi”, “kātalaṉ - kātali and “kiḻavaṉ
       - kiḻatti" have found their usage in it.
       A young man and a young woman established in a life of love and
       affection were not only called man and wife, but they were also “
       Thalaivaṉ “ and “Thalaivi” which appellations connote that they had
       been endowed with equal position and honour in the society. Because
       they shared their privileges equally they were called “Kilavaṉ” (he
       who had rights) and “Kilaththi” (she who had rights). Love
       manifests itself in the rights and freedom enjoyed by both of
       them.” [15]
       In the west, women, after their marriage, lose their birth
       identity. They take the name of their husbands. Such a practice
       indicative of inferior status of women does not obtain in this
       country. [16] Here the women continues to bear her maiden name even
       after her marriage.
       Tolkāppiyanār would permit marriage between a young man and a young
       woman even though he may be superior to the lady in certain
       respects, which may be, according to Nachchinārkkiniyar, parentage,
       education, age, etc.
       The practice of a young man marrying a lady elder to him is not
       prevalent in Tamil Nadu. A woman matures and grows much more early
       than a man. The life time of women was divided into seven
       catagories, Pédai (pētai) to Périlam peņ (pēriḷam peṇ). The upper
       limit of the last category Périlampen is forty years. It has been
       considered a natural virtue that a person who loves a woman should
       continue to protect her even in her old age.
       A lady companion (tōḻi) of the loved-one arranges for her elopement
       with her lover, and, at that time, commands the lover not to
       forsake the girl even when she grows old, her firm round breasts
       sag, and the long lustrous tresses grow grey.” [17]
       Bharatidasan in one of his poems says: “Her body is not soft like a
       newly opened blossom; it is like a bundle of grass; she no more
       walks with a dancing gait; she totters while she walks; her face
       does not shine like the full moon any more: it is like a withered
       piece of land; her eyes are dark pits. None of these changes afford
       me comport. It is only the thought that “she is yet alive” that
       gives me contentment.” [18]
       The characteristics and functions of a male are in many ways
       different from those of a female. Tolkāppiyanār lays down that
       nobility of birth and physical and rnental strength are made
       virtues.[19]
       Nachchinārkkiniyar defines nobility of birth (perumai) as including
       the characteristics of wisdom, strength, fame. generosity, faculty
       of discrimination, culture, friendliness, and avoiding sin and
       shame. He further defines “Uran” (uraṉ) as an inflinching stand
       against odds and the faculty of coming to right decisions in
       difficult situations.[20]
       Tolkāppiyanār assigns the characteristics fear, shyness, and
       reservation to women.[21] Nachchinărkkiniyar defines "Achcham”
       (fear) as the one that is born out of affection: “Nanam" (shyness)
       as the self restraint natural to women during love advances, and
       “Madam" as the continued compliance with the counsels of the
       lady-companions.
       Shyness (Nānam) is a greater virtue than love of life; and chastity
       surpases Nānam, [22] Above all the feminine virtues are enlarged to
       include humility, self restraint during amoros moments, an
       unbending mind, e*xquisitiness of expression and manners when in
       the act of wooing, a knowledge of good and bad, and the power of
       asserting it; and depth of mind.”[23]
       We find here that the virtues of a woman conform to her physical
       limitations and capacity.
       The ancient Tamils called love and marriage “Aham" (akam). The
       terms “Aham’’ can be interpreted to mean both the mind and the
       house. Dr. Rev. Thani Nayagam finds that of all literatures dealing
       in love episodes of young men and women all the world over, the
       “Aham treatment in Tamil Grammar is the most outstanding and
       incomparable.” [24]
       He further states that if any one has declared that a particular
       individual has fathomed the feminine mind better than Shakespeare
       he should be either an ignoramus or a great scholar.[25 As the
       Sangam poets have assessed women's mind as no others have done,
       they have to be deemed to be great men of wisdom.
       The literary places designated as Sangam literature include
       Paththuppāttu and Eṭṭuththogai anthologies and consist of 2381
       verses on the whole. Of these verses 1862 relate to Aham topics.
       Naṭrinai contains 500, Paripādal 8, Kaliththogai 149, Ahanānūru
       400, and Paththuppāttu 4,
       Most of the Aham songs revolve around the lady-love. The actors who
       take part in the thrilling dramas of the Aham life are Thalaivi
       (talaivi). Thalaivan (talaivaṉ), Thōli (tōḻi), Sevili (cevili),
       Naṟrrāi (naṟṟāy), and Pāṇgan (pāṅkaṉ). The Aham songs most of them,
       portrays the warm feelings of love, the throbbings of expectation
       and mental ecstasy etc, of the loved-ones.¨
       Dr. V. Sp. Manickam concludes his article with the following words:
       A literature, the object of which is the treatment of general
       behaviours of human beings, cannot but show respect for women in
       general. Indeed in the Sangam epoch, there was no superiority or
       inferiority of sexes. The Tamils regarded man and woman as two
       different beings of the class “uyartiṇai’’ or rational beings.
       They, as the Greeks did, entrusted the managemant of the family and
       the bringing up of children to women, while outside came to be
       responsibility of man. Monogamy and chastity were strictly enjoined
       on woman for the uninterrupted continuation of family life, and for
       the procreation of good and pure progeny. Thus society depended
       upon and consciousness of women of their responsibility for its
       stability and existence."[26]
       I shall now proceed with the songs, the themes of which fall into
       Aham type: These poems declare unequivocally the extraordinary
       measure of freedom, women enjoyed in the domestic and social set
       up.
       “An interesting information is furnished by a 'Kuṟiṇci-k-kali'
       song. “The parents of a young girl who has already fallen in love
       with a young man have been proposing her in marriage to another
       one. The ‘Tholi' is anxious to see that the "Thalaivi" is not
       forced by circumstances to lose her virtues. She would very
       delicately disclose her friend's love to her mother either
       impliedly or openly. The mother will reveal the information to her
       husband, and sons. They might spend a day or two in irritation and
       disappointment; but finally after careful consideration agree to
       the girl's selection. When the parents after sufficient enquiry
       found out that their daughter had after all accepted a suitable,
       eligible young man as her lover, they were ashamed of their anger
       and hung their heads in shame.” [27]
       The tact and ingenuity displayed by the Thōḷi (lady companion) in
       her recommendations of the choice of the lady love are applaudable.
       She tells the parents of the girl stricken with love that a young
       man had saved her from being carried away by floods while bathing
       in a river, that while she was being rescued by him her young
       breasts crushed against his embrace, that she, at that very
       ecstatic moment decided to love him and accept him as her lord, and
       herself as his wedded wife, and that she could not sacrifice her
       chastity by being married to another person. She further warns the
       parents of the girl that if the people of the Kuṟiṇci village
       decided against the dear wishes of the girl a curse will strike the
       mountain side. The Vaḷḷi creeper will not yield tubers; the bees
       will not build their fat hives; the ear of the Thiṇai corn will be
       very thin. The Kuṟiṇci girls have never swerved from the path of
       virtue. Because they worship their husbands as the lord of their
       hearts, even their brothers enjoy the uncanny gift of aiming
       faultless arrows on their quarries.
       But for the tireless efforts of the “Tholi" (lady companion) the
       lady-in-love would not have married the youngman who had been the
       object of her affections and care.
       In another Kuṛunthogai song we learn that when the relatives of the
       lover approached the parents of the loved-one asking her hand in
       marriage to the same young man, the lady in love enquires
       inquisitively her maid friend whether her parents had signified
       their acceptance of the match. [28] She is being assured by the
       lady companion that they had consigned her to the rightful
       ownership of the lover.[29]
       On this poem Dr. U.V. Swaminatha Ayyar comments as follows: Of all
       the persons and things that are owned by a person the wife claims a
       special position and status. Hence she is said to have been
       consigned to the rightful ownership of the lover. [30]
       It was the practice in those ancient days to send elderly
       emissaries to ask for the hand of the loved-one at the instance of
       the lover. As these messengers were instrumental in bringing
       together these lovers in marriage they were called the “Agents" who
       made the young couple to speak together in marriage.[31]
       A young man and his lady-love had eloped. The foster mother of the
       girl searches for her in the cruel grim palai tract. She had
       rambled far and wide. She was dead tired and could walk no more.
       She saw many couples on her path going or coming hand in hand. Not
       one of them was the one she had been in search after. The lady
       companion wonders that those who have been eloping count more than
       the stars in the wide skies.[32]
       It is a pleasant surprise for the Tamils of the 20th century to
       learn from those literary records that their ancestors practised
       elopement so very widely.
       Here is another instance of elopement. A lady-love elopes with her
       lover and they both proceed along the hot Palai tract. The foster
       mother goes in search after the missing couple. On her way she
       meets with Tiridandi Sanyasis (tiritaṇṭi canniyācikaḷ). She hails
       them, and asks them if they had seen a young girl, her own
       daughter, and a young man the son of another woman, who had loved
       one another walking together.
       The reply given by the Sanyasis is the most interesting piece of
       information that has gone in Tamil literature as a priceless
       literary gem. The more it has been quoted the more lustre it has
       gathered. Well, this is their reply.
       “O venerable mother. You may return home happily. We did behold a
       handsome youngman in the company of a beautiful girl; you should be
       proud of being the mother of the girl who had the strength of heart
       to follow her lord in these terrible Palai tracts The Sandal tree
       is born on the slopes of mountains. But it gives pleasure to those
       who smear its rubbings on their chests and not to the mountains.
       Your daughter is likewise too.
       The priceless pearls though born of the deep sea are of no use to
       the place of their birth, but are worn with pleasure by persons
       knowing their value. Your daughter is also a pearl to you but
       valuable to her lover.
       The sweet music arising from the seven strings of a yāḷ (yāḻ) is
       enjoyable not by the yāḷ but only by a listener. So also daughter
       is of exquisite value not to you but to her lover only.
       Therefore, O mother, do not feel sorry for the elopement of your
       daughter. Do not pursue her any further, she is a gem of chastity.
       She has gone away in the company of her lover. What she has done is
       accepted by canon of feminine virtues and moral law. [32]
       The women of ancient Tamilagam knew and appreciated the value of
       their married status. They had understood that they had more to do
       with the duties of their husband's homes than singing the glory of
       their parents’ houses.
       They had realised that the life in their husband's house was
       natural and a part of feminine virtues.
       “We have already seen how the parents, the neighbours, the sages
       and the hero bowed their heads in reverence to the noble quality of
       chastity. We have also seen that a girl after her association with
       a youth keeps her loyalty at all costs, even disregarding her
       parents and experiencing any amount of hardships. Therefore the
       main figure in Ahaththinai (akattiṇai) around which all other
       figures revolve and the chief quality to which all other qualities
       are attached are the heroism and her chastity,”[33]
       The Aham songs inform us that the practice of the bridegroom paying
       a price for the hand of the girl he was marrying existed largely in
       Tamilagam. A poem in Aiṅkuṟunῡru states that a lady companion
       happily assures the lady love that her lord has assigned her
       parents his very kingdom in return for her hand.[34] The old
       commentator of the anthology goes a step further and says that the
       youngman wanted to gift the entire world to her loved one, but as
       that was not possible, he parted with his country.
       The Ᾱyar's (shepherds) did not value the bride price (breast) Price
       or (mulaivilai) very much. But they valued the high valour of a
       young man who could plunge in between the two sharp horns of a
       bull, as he would in between the breasts of his love, and bring it
       under control in the bull fighting sports [35] Two verses in
       Akanānῡru” [36] bear evidence to the practice of receiving
       brideprice.
       A lover, resident of the Neydal tract thinks within himself thus :
       “My Iove is a most beautiful one. She is too valuable a gift that I
       can obtain even though l could exchange boat loads of the best
       wealth possess in return for her."[37]
       From the instances quoted above we have to infer that during the
       Sangam period girls were considered as pieces of property owned by
       a person. Contrary to this practice in modern Tamil Nadu
       bridegrooms insist on receiving large sums of money as Sridhanam
       from the bride's parents.
       The entry of a bride into her husband's house hold as an important
       member thereof is hailed as a fortunate occasion. [38] Instances
       have been quoted which reveal that a household. that was being
       carried on the mere pittance obtained from the sale of a single
       cow's milk, now after the auspicious arrival of the bride has
       blossomed into one of fairs and festivities.
       We may recall, in this connection the proverb, widely circulated in
       Modern Tamil Nadu, which says “what can do he plougher? The fortune
       follows the woman who handles his cooking utensils." (ēr piṭittavaṉ
       eṉṉa ceyvāṉ; pāṉai piṭittavaḷ pākkiyam)
       But all bride prices however much sumptuous they might have been,
       have not fetched the brides. There have been cases when parents
       have refused to give their daughter in marriage to a young man
       inspite of his offer of valuable gifts as he was otherwise
       ineligible to her. [39]
       Sometimes the lover would go out to earn enough bride money to be
       offered to his loved-one. The marital act the bride groom locking
       his hand with that of his bride was called “Kodai“ (koṭai). [40]
       IN THE LOVE-LIFE OF IN THE SETTING
       (BACKGROUND OF THE FIVE TRACTS OF LAND)
       A loved one exalts the love she bore toward her lord as large than
       the world, deeper than the seas and loftier than the skies. [41]
       Another young girl in love asserts that though her lover had not
       yet pleasured her she feels ecstatic by merely keeping on looking
       at him. [42] A loved-one finds comfort in her lover's wiping her
       tears and whispering words of endearment into her ears. [43]
       There is a species of water-birds called “Mahaṇṛil" (makaṉṟil): The
       mating couples always keep together closely. As they float about
       swimming on the streams even if a flower used to pass in between
       them, they will consider the interference several years long.
       Similarly a lady love laments for her separation from her lord,
       though it might have been only a momentary one. [44]
       One lady love questions whether she will feel happy at home while
       her lord will feel insecure and meet with dangers in the forests if
       he leaves her for a while on any mission. [45]
       A woman declares that the husbands are the life and soul of young
       women who live at home [46]
       A lady companion (tōḻi) is surprised at the tiny spark of life in
       the lady-love bearing the huge love for her lord even as a tiny
       twig stands supporting the big jackfruit. [47]
       These affectionate and amorous experiences and expressions of the
       lady-love are reciprocated by the lovers also. A lover declares
       that the liquid charms of his loved one have extinguished his fiery
       tempers. [48] Another would never lose the affections of his loved
       one even though he might be offered in exchange the whole world
       surrounded by the seas. [49] Yet another one thinks that the days
       spent in sleeping with his love are the most useful one, and the
       other days are futile. [50]
       Here is another lover who would be happy to spend a single happy,
       pleasant day with his lover, and he does not want even half a day
       longer. [51] A lover in Paṭṭiṉ appalāi refuses to get separated
       from his loved-one even though he may be offered the entire city of
       the flourishing Kāviri p-pῡmpaṭṭinam [52]
       THE LOVE THAT DOES NOT WEAR OUT
       A young woman says that her husband continues to show her the same
       love and affection which he exhibited at the time of their
       marriage.53 Another lady is very happy that the affections of her
       lord have actually increased since their marriage. [54]
       In these instances one could see a thread of a philosophical import
       running through. As the married life of the young couple advances
       the physical attraction slowly wears out, but the union of their
       hearts gathers strength step by step,
       ΤΗΕ LΑΜΡ ΟF ΤΗΕ ΗΟΜΕ
       We have already seen that because a woman adds illumination to a
       home she is called the lamp of the home (maṉaikku viḷakku) because
       a woman rules over the hearth she is called the ruler of the house
       (illāḷ) because she is the head of the house she is called the
       “Manai Mutalvi ' (maṉai mutalvi), and because she constituted
       life's inseparable campanion she was called “Vālkkaithuṇaivi"
       (vāḻkkait tuṇaivi).
       There are no comparative male appellations such as “Illān“ (illāṉ),
       “Maņaivaņ" (maṉaivaṉ), or “Maṉai Mudhalvaṉ" (maṉai mutalvaṉ) in
       Tamil language.
       The back portion of the houses was considered a place of
       importance, because it is presided over by the lady of the house,
       and it was the main entrance to the house, because the front
       portion of the house, where the men-folk sojourned was considered
       less important when compared to the back portion. This fact is
       borne out by literary evidences Well, here is an evidence. The
       famous author of "Siṛupāṇāṟṟuppaḍai" gives us a life-like
       description of the family of a Pāṇaṉ struck by chill penury and
       suffering from indigence and want, says the author — “Little
       puppies which have not even opened their eyes yet are suckling the
       dry nipples of their mothers, and they are crying of anguish
       because no milk comes; the strings which kept the bamboo rafters
       bound with the roof of the house are worn out and cut into pieces,
       the fireplace in the kitchen which has not seen fire for a long
       time has fallen into disuse. It is infested with fungus. It has
       become a place for dogs to sleep. The lady of the house with her
       body withered due to interminable fire of hunger, with a lean waist
       and with emaciated bangled arms plucks little heads of volai
       (vēḷai) greens, found grown on the dust heap, with her nails and
       cooks them without salt. The lady was shy that unscrupulous
       persons, ignorant of the fact that poverty was but a natural
       occurrence, could talk low of her. She therefore hurries to the
       “kadai" (kaṭai) shuts it and shares the poor fare with her starving
       relatives. [55] Here the terms “shut the kadai" has been
       interpreted by Nachchiṉārkkiṉiyar as “shut the Thalaivāsal" (main
       entrance).
       WΟΜΕΝ ΑND CΗΑSΤΙΤΥ
       In the Sangam works a woman is always spoken of along with her
       chastity. We have references to “a good woman who, distinguished
       for her divine virtue of chastity, has acquired additional
       censideration by begetting a good child which shines like a lamp in
       the house, [56] and then again to a woman with the assets of
       chastity and a lustrous forehead." [57]
       Women are praised in the Sangam literature as always uttering sweet
       and useful words, as possessing beautiful red mouths yielding the
       divine nectar and as blessed with beautiful eyes, lustrous forehead
       and a swaying gait. [58]
       Women are always referred to as maṅkaḷa makaḷīr. [59] maṉaiyōḷ,
       [60] veyyōḷ [61], vacaiyil makaḷir, [62] melliyal makaḷir [63]
       cēyiḻai makaḷir [64] They are also described as exemplary women
       whom even Arundadhi worshipped. [65]. Here again I shall like to
       echo the words of my learned Professor Dr. Varadarajanar. He says
       that—“No other language than Tamil language contains literary works
       glorifying the freedom of women. To doubt the fidelity of one's
       wife was considered the height of one’s foolishness (kayamai). This
       foolishness does not find a place in Tamil literature. But it can
       be found in the works of other languages including English. But the
       Aham works always refer to the Lady suspecting the fidelity of her
       lover or husband. That is why the stature of women is found raised
       in Tamilaham. That is why the women were called “Nallār" (nallār)
       [66].
       PETTY CONJUGAL QUARRELS AND THE PRIVELEGES OF WOMEN
       (ūṭal urimai)
       We come across many instances of petty quarrels between the husband
       and wife in the treatment of Marudattiņai (marutattiṇai) in Tamil
       literature.
       A marudam woman, angry at her husband returning to her from the
       house of a harlot, asks him wildly “who asked you go over here?"
       [67] Another lady aggressively questions “How are you related to
       us? You are a big man. I am trembling with sorrow and suffering. Am
       I your wife? Get away from me. [68]" A third woman retorts in a
       rage “who are you that comes here and touches my tresses. It is
       cruelty on your part. Do not go to my house. Return as you came.”
       [69] Another woman of certain amount of tragic humour remarks: " O,
       you who enters into my house! Who are you? I knew you. You always
       appear in marriage embellishments, even as a honey bee endlessly
       search for nectar from blossom to blossom.” [70]
       The lady has been head of the domestic establishment. The house
       belongs to her. She always refers to it as “my house." Whereas, the
       husband never calls it as “his house." The exalted position which
       the Sangam women claimed for themselves is perhaps due to their
       unflinching virtue of chastīty, strength of mind and a sense of
       righteousness. [71]
       It has been always considered a great privilege to be born in a
       family characterised by these virtues and culture. Hence a woman is
       eulogised as possessing the highest quality of chastity, [72] and,
       as godly enough to be worshipped by even Arundati, the northern
       star [73].
       ΜΕΝ ΑΝD CΗΑSΤΙΤΥ
       Poet Bhāratiyār has called the virtue of chastity the common
       property of woman as well as man. [74]
       Some scholars have considered that during the Sangam period only
       women were required to be chaste and not men. I am afraid they have
       not perhaps perused the poem of Chölan Nalaṅkilii (cōḻaṉ
       nalaṅkiḷḷi). He raises words of vengence and declares: If they go
       to me in supplication and humility I shall give away to them not
       only my Kingdom, but also my life, Whoever taunts foolishly my
       valour shall suffer destruction like a blind man who steps on the
       tail of a reposing tiger. Like a bamboo shoot bent at the foot of
       an elephant I shall pursue my enemy upto his own place and destroy
       him. If I fail in what I have declared, let me embrace loveless
       public women and let my garland fade away.” [75]
       If a Chola monarch could have praised the male chastity so much,
       how much value ordinary folk would have placed on it, we have only
       to imagine and estimate.
       Ollaiyῡr Thantha Bhῡdappāņḍiyan (ollaiyūr tanta pūtappāṇṭiyaṉ) had
       an occasion to declare thus:-
       “I will inflict crushing defeat on my enemies who may spring on me
       like the raging lions. If I fail in my efforts. I shall sever
       myself from the company of my wife.[76]
       Because this monarch was so much attached to his wife, she decided
       upon committing suttee on his death, which I referred to in my talk
       yesterday. [77] Because some scholars are of the opinion that the
       practice of “Suttee” shows the state of slavery of women of those
       period.
       LOVE OF ANIMALS
       We find in one of the Kuṛunthogai songs a depiction of
       manifestation of love among animals too. The maid companion
       entreats the lover not to meet his lady love in night trysts; but
       to marry her as early as possible.
       In that connection she recalls to a mind of the lover certain
       traits observed in mountain monkeys She says:
       "The male monkey is dead. Its mate, a beautiful animal, could not
       bear a lonely widowed life. The young one in her arms is too tender
       to climb the trees and seek for food. Therefore, the female monkey
       hands over the young one to the care of its relatives and rolls
       down the slopes of a high his to death. You are the chief of the
       hill where such virtue is being displayed even by irrational
       beings. Do not go to your love during night hours, We are all
       afraid very much that some danger may overtake you on your way.
       Blessed by you.” [78]
       ΤΗΕ FΟLLΥ ΟF LUSΤΙΝG FΟR ΑΝΟΤΗΕR'S WΙFΕ
       Selva-k-kaduṅgō Vāliyādaņ (celvak kaṭuṅkō vāḻiyātaṉ) is the hero of
       the poem forming the seventh decade of Padhiṛṛuppattu sung by
       Kapilar. He attributes to the monarch the rare virtue of exposing
       his chast to none but his own wives. [79]
       Tiruvalluvar exalts the male chastity to a very high rank, He calls
       the virtue the summation of manhood not yielding to the temptations
       of looking at another person’s wife with amorous intentions. [80]
       Though it might not been possible for a person not to tread the
       path of righteousness in his life, his life would yet be a straight
       one, if only he does not covet his neighbour's wife. [81]
       But there has been a black sheep also among the ancient Tamil
       kings. Bégan (pēkaṉ), a chieftain abandoned his wife Kannaki,
       embarked on a loose life, and, for that act of loneliness and
       contempt, poets like Kapilar. [82] , Paranar [83], Arsil Kilār
       [84], and Peruṅkuṉṛῡrkilār [85] have raised their hands in
       reproach.
       In the course of domestic life certain occasions are bound to arise
       when the husband would have to submit to his wife simply without
       any remonstrance. Such occasions will arise during the course of
       conjugal differences according to Tolkippiyanár. [86]
       The wife is sulking. Her husband is trying to humour her. His wife
       asks him not to waste his precious time and not be uttering lies to
       her. She asks him to go and tempt any lady who would listen to him.
       The lord says: “My dear girl unless you direct your gracious glance
       upon me I shall not live.” From this instance we have to infer that
       it is the husband, who may sometimes swerve from the path of
       virtue, and never the wife; and, that, during the times of conjugal
       quarrels the husband will abjectly submit to his wife. [87]
       Some times the husband may fall flat at the feet of his wife. She
       will re nonstrate that his conduct was bad, and that it may give an
       occasion to his harlot friends to laugh at him. We find such
       instances related in later Tamil works. [88]
       A Kurunthogai verse relates an incident involving a harlot, she say
       that the lover was acting as if he surrendered himself to her
       absolutely, but after returning to his wife he is behaving as
       though he was a mere image in a mirror moving its limbs. [89]
       Tolkāppiyalir calls chastity the right of a woman much to be
       admired and feared by others [90]. According to Nachchinārkkiniyar,
       a wife engaged in running a home during her married life, possesses
       the capacity of domestic management, generosity to give to others,
       and mighty virtue of chastity.
       Tolkāppiyanār denies the right of women accompanying their husbands
       to battle-fields. [91]
       Pāndiyan Neduṅcheḷiyaṉ was embarked on his war actions. He
       continued to fight even when the fierce cold north wind commenced
       to blow,
       Before starting an attack on the enemy. a warning used to be
       proclaimed by the raiding King. He will ask cattle, Andhanars,
       women, sick people, those who had not begotten any children to be
       removed to a safer place. Similarly Kannaki, before she proceeded
       to consign Madurai to flames by the curse, commanded that the God
       of fire should not harm Andhanars, men of renunciation and wisdom,
       chaste women, elderly people and children, but he should consume
       only evil doers [92]
       NANNAN WHO MURDERED A WOMAN
       Killing a woman was considered a most heinous and abominable crime
       [93].
       A young woman went to a stream to bathing. A mango fruit belonging
       to Naṉṉan, a chieftain, was coming floating on the stream. Not
       knowingly it belonged to Naṉṉan, the girl ate the fruit. Naṉṉan was
       angry and killed her, even though, gold equal to her weight and
       eighty one bull elephants were offered to him in compensation of
       the loss of the mango fruit. Hence Nannan fell headlong into the
       hell for the crime of killing a woman. [94]
       The old commentator of Puṟanānῡṟu states, that because of Naṉṉan's
       detestable crime his descendants were all excommunicated by men of
       wisdom. [95]
       During the Sangam period Kosars noted for their wisdom and
       truthfulness were inhabiting in various places in Tamiḷaham. They
       got very angry at the outrageous crime of Nannan, cut down his
       totem tree and wreaked their vengence on Naṉṉan's Kingdom. [96]
       WOMEN PROHIBITED FROM THE EXTREME ACT OF EXHIBITION OF LOVE CALLED
       “MADALERUTHAL”
       Whatever calamity might occur, women were not eligible to perform
       the act of “Magaléruthal" [97] There have been references in Sangam
       works to the threats of lovers to perform the extreme act, if they
       did not win their loved-ones. But there has not been even a single
       instance of a person having performed the act, or of having lost
       his life thereby.
       Tolkāppiyanar lays down that, as a rule, a young man does not take
       with him his loved-one on high seas [98]. Perhaps the young man was
       anxious that his lady-love should not undergo the troubles and
       travails as he would be subject on sea voyages.
       CHILDREN
       Tiruvalluvar says that a woman of virtue is an auspicious
       possession of a family; and that good children are ornaments of the
       family. [99]
       The wife adds a glow to the home. Her children make her glorious.
       Ilanāgaṉār (iḷanākaṉār), a Sangam poet extols the virtues of a wife
       who has given to the family a good progeny [100]. Ālaṅguḍi
       Vaṉgaṉār, another poet blesses women who are chaste and bring forth
       good children [101].
       In Marudam Tinai poems we find that it is the son who brings
       together his father and mother, who had quarrelled on account of
       the loose morals of the former.
       The husband spends the whole day in the company of a harlot, but
       returns home for the night. Not minding the rebukes of his wife he
       hugs his little boy to his bosom and feion going to bed. The
       enraged wife orders him out of the house and not to touch her son.
       But the culprit tells her that the boy bears the name of his
       father, and he would hug him, and that mattered nothing for
       her.[102]
       A poem in Akanānūru describes a similar event. [103]
       THE SPORTS OF YOUNG WOMEN
       Women practised “Thunaṅgai dance'104 (tuṇaṅkaik kūttu) when the
       season for the entertainment arrived. [105] They would play the
       first round with the person they Ioved. [106]
       The Tamil women exhibited extraordinary pleasure in bathing in
       ponds and streams [107].” This sport is described not only in
       Sangam literature but also in later Purānās. Before their marriage,
       the women of Saṇgam age were accompanied by their maid-companions
       to plunge in water, and after their marriage their husbands took
       the places of the lady companions (tōḻikaḷ). The young women appear
       to have been endowed with a large amount of freedom is going about
       for seeking pleasures of entertainment, and not to have been bound
       to their hearth like slaves. [108] There were also certain
       religious rites prescribed for young girls such as “Pävai-Nōnbu”
       (pāvai nōṉpu) which entailed arising before dawn and going to a
       river or a pond to bathe and perform the rites, at the same time,
       praying to their Gods for the gift of a good husband. [109]
       There is an interesting account in Maduraikkāṇchi of women
       resorting to Tirupparaṅkunram, and worshipping at the temple of God
       Murugan with their hands locked with those of their husbands and
       children. This shows that they had been moving about freely and
       could visit any place of their choice [110]. Paripādal also gives
       us a graphic account of families and relations gathering at
       Tirumāl-Iruñcholai (tirumāliñcōlai) for worshipping Thirumål
       (tirumāl) [111].
       A lord of the Kuriñchi tract is reported to have performed severe
       penance and had a daughter born to him [112]. The great poet
       Pisirandaiyār (picirāntaiyār), when questioned how he could have
       continued to sport his dark hair, even in his advanced years,
       replied that it was possible for him, because, he had the fortune
       of possessing a wife *was very good to him possessing exemplary
       character. [113]
       We have already seen that more than fifty women poets have
       contributed to the enrichment of the Sangam literature. Women
       appear to have been aware of the cultural and other possibilities
       afforded by education and many of them have excelled in enlargement
       of their knowledge. Poet Avvaiyār was a scholar respected and
       revered by chieftains and monarchs. King Adhigamān held her in such
       honour and reverence that he presented her a rare Nelli fruit
       (nellikkaṉi) which had the divine attribute of prolonging life even
       though he might have tasted the Karpa drug (kaṟpam). [114] The
       poetess. In her turn, exercised her good offices to see that the
       proposed war between Adhigaman and Thondaimān did not happen at
       all. [115]
       STOOPING TO WIFE (peṇvaḻic cēṟal)
       This term has been explained by Parimēlaḷakar, a renowned
       commentator of Tirukkural, as connoting a person following a wife
       who had her own predilections and ways of life.[116] . Dr. M.
       Varadarajanar has the following remarks to offer in the matter in
       one of his expositions of Tirukkuṟal. “A man has certain family
       duties to attend, and also certain public duties. A woman who has
       been depicted by: Tiruvalluvar in his Araththuppäl as a life's
       companion, and in Porutpāl as a colleague facilitating the
       performance of his public functions. Tiruvalluvar has a word of
       disapprobation only when the woman stands as an obstruction to the
       efficient discharge of the duties of her husband. Even then it is
       interesting to note, he does not rebuke the wayward woman herself,
       but proceeds to rectify her husband only. He expresses emphatically
       against a woman crossing the path of her husband's duties to the
       public. Tiruvalluvar has always offered to women an equal status
       with men. The frailty of a woman bending to all the whims of her
       husbands will disrupt a family. Similarly a man becoming a slave to
       the caprices of his wife will hurt his public iife.”1 [117]
       THE ULTIMATE LOWERING OF WOMEN'S STATUS
       Subsequently at the end of the Sangam epoch the status of women in
       Tamil society appears to have suffered a fall.
       The domestic virtue of the husband valuing his duties as his life,
       and the wife considering her husband as her life, began to lose its
       meaning and importance. Because in some of the Pathiṉeṇ-kiḷkkaṇakku
       (patiṉeṇkīḻkkaṇakku) compositions we are distressed to find the
       following remarks:
       “Innā Nāṛpathu” says that a man should shun as poison a woman with
       soft, rounded, bamboo like a shoot.[118]
       Blemished and implaceable women have been beaten with sticks.[119]
       A termagent wife,[120] a woman involving herself in legal
       fights,[121] and a man always living in fear of his wife have all
       come under the condemnation of the later day moralists.[122]
       Various reasons have been adduced for the fall of women from their
       high pedestal in society. One of them is that the Jain and
       Buddhistic Doctrines spread widely in Tamilaham during the 5th, 6th
       and 7th centuries A.D. and that these faiths carried a propaganda
       that women stood on the path of the spiritual progress of man.
       THE GREATNESS ACHIEVED BY MEN THROUGH WOMEN
       Whenever a man, whether a king or a chieftain has been spoken of
       the Sangam literature by the poets they are mostly referred to as
       the husband of such and such a lady. This fact is an important one
       and has to be assessed adequately.
       The poets of Pathiṛṛuppaththu have hailed the heroes of the
       compositions with the following attributes:
       “Nallōļ Kaņavaṉ" (nallōḷ kaṇavaṉ) [124]
       “Puraiyōļ Kaņavaṉ” (puraiyōḷ kaṇavaṉ) [125]
       “Sēyilai Kaņavaṉ" (cēyiḻai kaṇavaṉ) [126] and
       “Oṇḍoṭi-k-Kaņavaṉ" (oṇṭoṭik kaṇavaṉ) [127]
       In one of the love episodes of “Aham" life, we are informed that a
       maid-companion to the lady-in-love refuses to bring the Thalaivi
       (talaivi) to her lover. The lover then threatens that he would ride
       the palmyra horse (maṭalēṟutal) and proclaim to the wide world that
       his love had brought him to this plight with her unrequired love;
       If people saw in the painted picture, he was carrying, the images
       of both himself and his loved-one together, they will find out
       which good girls lord he was. He is proud to refer himself as the
       lord of a “good girl” (nallōḷ) [128]
       Nakkirar calls God Murugan as the husband of Deiva Yānai, of
       unblemished chastity, perhaps because of the traditional attributes
       of virtues and goodness given to women.[129]
       Thiruñāṇna Sambandar, refers to Lord Siva as the father of Murugan,
       the husband of Valli in his Thirumaraikkädu hymn (tirumaṟaikkāṭṭut
       tiruppatikam). [130]''
       CONCLUSION
       Ladies and Gentlemen,
       I believe it is time for me to conclude. I have placed before you
       enough material these two days to enable a study of the high status
       and position women had attained during the Sangam period. We have
       seen how they had the extraordinary privilege and freedom of choice
       in selecting their life's partners, how they had been offering
       their husbands conjugal pleasures and the counsels of a minister,
       and above all how they had been treated as the queens of the home.
       Even a person, given to occasional moral lapses like friendship
       with Paraththais, returns like a black sheep to his wife
       ultimately. Though she is angry with him she employs words of moral
       authority and rebuke. The husband admits that she has a right to
       reprimand him for his act of infidelity.
       While in the Iater literary compositions like Puranas, Kövais etc.,
       it had become the custom of the poets to sing on the rapturous
       beauty of a feminine form, the Sangam poets mostly confined their
       attention to the mental equipment and cultural attainments of
       women. The Sangam poets had always been harping on the virtues of
       chastity, and culture.
       The late lamented Rājāji has pronounced that to become a gentleman,
       one requires a man's brain, a woman's heart and the feeling of a
       child.
       The Bible contains a sage advice that a cultured wife is the crown
       of her husband. In concluding I wish to emphasise on the fact that
       the women of ancient Tamilagam were in enjoyment of higher
       privileges, freedom, scope and opportunities than at any time
       later.
       Ladies and Gentleman, it had been my privilege to deliver these
       endowment lectures and I know the audience is a discriminating,
       critical and at the same time an appreciative
       I hope Ladies and Gentlemen that I have not trespassed on your
       patience and forbearance.
       Mr. President, you had been very kind and considerate to me these
       two days, and it was my rare and good fortune to deliver my first
       endowment lectures under your auspices.
       I am very happy that my chief Dr. Sanjeevi, has always been
       insisting on me, as on all research scholars that a research worker
       should go deep into a matter and then make a comparative study of
       it. “The two mottos he has coined are'' (oppu nōkkuvōm) and uṟṟu
       nōkkuvōm." These mottos have been stimulating and inspiring
       students of Tamil like me and have served to d*escipline and
       regulate research work.
       I am grateful very much to the Ladies especially who have graced
       this occasion in large numbers and *bent their patient ears to my
       talk.
       At the risk of repetition, I should like to thank again Dr. M.
       Varadarajanar but for whose insistent efforts to mould me in my
       formative years and instil into me a sense of duty. love of Tamil
       and power of expression; I should not have been what I am now.
       ---------------
       References, Notes for Part 1
       1. Kavimaņi Dēsika Vināyakam Piļļais "Malarum Mālaiyum."
       - peṇṇiṉ urimaikaḷ, p. 148
       2. Bhāratīdāsaņ: "Bhāratidāsaņ Kavitaikaļ."
               -- Volume 1. "Penkalaipparri Bernard Sha”
       3. Bhāratidāsaņ: *BhāratidasenKavitaikal"—Volume-1.
               -- peṇkuḻantai tālāṭṭu,
       4. Bhāratidāsan, kuṭumpa viḷakku, pākam. 1, p. 16
       5. “ nāṭā koṉṟō kāṭā koṉṟō
       avalā koṉṟō micaiyā koṉṟō
       evvaḻi nallava rāṭavar
       avvaḻi nallai vāḻiya nilaṉē."
       - auvaiyār, puṟanāṉūṟu, 187
       6.' accamum nāṉum maṭaṉumun tuṟutta
       niccamum peṇpāṟ kuriya eṉpa.'
       -         tolkāppiyam, kaḷaviyal, 8
       7 ceṟivum niṟaiyuñ cemmaiyuñ ceppum
       aṟivum arumaiyum peṇpā lāṉa."
               - tolkāppiyam, poruḷiyal, 15 .
       8. "mātar kātal’
               -- tolkāppiyam,, uyiriyal, 32
       9. uyiriṉuñ ciṟantaṉṟu nāṇē nāṇiṉuñ
       ceyirtir kāṭcik kaṟpucciṟan taṉṟeṉat
       tollōr kiḷavi pulliya neñcamoṭu
       kāmak kiḻava ṉuḷvaḻip paṭiṉun
       tāvil naṉmoḻi kiḻavi kiḷappiṉum
       āvakai piṟavun tōṉṟumaṉ poruḷē.
       - tolkāppiyam,, kaḷaviyal, 23
       10. "perumaiyum uraṉum āṭūu mēṉa.”
               - tolkāppiyam, kaḷaviyal, 7
       11. ”nīrō raṉṉa cāyal
       tīyō raṉṉaveṉ ṉuraṉavit taṉṟē'
               - kuṟuntokai, 95:4-5
       12. "nīrō raṉṉa cāyal”
               - kuṟuntokai, 95:4
       '13. payiliyatu keḻiiya naṭpiṉ mayiliyaṟ
               -- kuṟuntokai,, 2:3
       14. "naṟuntaṇ ṇiyaḷē naṉmā mēṉi'
               -- kuṟuntokai,, 168:4
       15. "ceṟiyeyiṟ ṟarivai kūntaliṉ
       naṟiyavu muḷavō nī yaṟiyum pūvē'
               -- kuṟuntokai,, 2:4-5
       16. “yāyā kiyaḷē māa yōḷē'
               - - kuṟuntokai, 9
       maiyī rōti māayōḷvayiṉ.”
               - - kuṟuntokai, 199
       17. pūvoṭu puraiyuṅ kaṇṇum vēyeṉa
       viṟalvaṉap peytiya tōḷum piṟaiyeṉa
       matimayak kuṟūu nutalum --- kuṟuntokai, 226:1-3
       18. vēyeṉat tiraṇṭatōḷ veṟikamaḻ vaṇaraimpāl
       māveṉṟa maṭanōkkiṉ mayiliyal taḷarpolki
       āycilam pariyārppa aviroḷi yiḻaiyimaippak
       koṭiyeṉa miṉṉeṉa aṇaṅkeṉa yātoṉṟun
       terikallā iṭaiyiṉkaṭ kaṇkavar poruṅkōṭa
       vaḷamaicā luyarciṟappiṉ nuntaitol viyaṉakar
       iḷamaiyāṉ eṟipantō ṭikattantāy kēḷiṉi.'”
               kalittokai, kuṟiñcikkali - 21: 1-7
       19. piṟappē kuṭimai āṇmai yāṇṭō
       ṭuruvu niṟutta kāma vāyil
       niṟaiyē yaruḷē uṇarvoṭu tiruveṉa
       muṟaiyuṟak kiḷanta oppiṉatu vakaiyē.”
               --tolkāppiyam, meyppāṭṭiyal, 25
       20. “oṉṟē vēṟē eṉṟiru pālvayiṉ
       oṉṟi uyarnta pāla tāṇaiyiṉ
       otta kiḻavaṉuṅ kiḻattiyum kāṇpa
       mikkō ṉāyiṉuṅ kaṭivarai yiṉṟē.'
               - tolkāppiyam, kaḷaviyal, 2
       21. ”oḷiṟuvā ḷaruñcama murukkik
       kaḷiṟeṟintu peyartal kāḷaikkuk kaṭaṉē.”
               - puṟanāṉūṟu, 31 2:5-6
       22. “muṉaikkuvaram pākiya veṉvē ṉeṭuntakai."
               - puṟanāṉūṟu, 314-2
       23. “īṉṟa vayiṟō vituvē
       tōṉṟuvaṉ mātō pōrkkaḷat tāṉē.”
               - puṟanāṉūṟu, 86:5-6
       24. “poyyā nāviṟ kapilaṉ pāṭiya,’’
               - puṟanāṉūṟu, 174:10
       25.” kuṟiyiṟaik kurampaik kuṟavar mākkaḷ
       vāṅkamaip paḻuṉiya tēṟaṉ makiḻntu
       vēṅkai muṉṟiṟ kuravai yayarum
       tīñcuḷaip palaviṉ māmalaik kiḻavaṉ
       ā.a yaṇṭira ṉaṭupō raṇṇal
       iravalark kītta yāṉaiyiṟ karaviṉṟu
       vāṉa mīṉ pala pūppi ṉāṉā
       toruvaḻik karuvaḻi yiṉṟip
       peruveḷ ḷeṉṉiṟ piḻaiyātu maṉṉē.”
               - puṟanāṉūṟu, 129
       26. "kuṉṟak kuṟavaṉ kaṭavuṭ pēṇi
       irantaṉaṉ peṟṟa elvaḷaik kuṟumakaḷ
       āyari neṭuṅkaṇ kaluḻac
       cēyatāṟ ṟeyyanī piriyu nāṭē."
               -aiṅkuṟunūṟu, 257
       27. “cuṉaippūk kuṟṟut toṭalai tai.ip
       puṉakkiḷi kaṭiyum pūṅkaṭ pētai."
               - kuṟuntokai, 142:2-1
       28. "viḷaiyā ṭāyamoṭu orai yāṭātu
       iḷaiyōr illiṭat tiṟceṟin tiruttal
       aṟaṉum aṉṟē ākkamun tēymmeṉak
       kuṟunurai cumantu naṟumalar untip
       poṅkivaru putunīr neñcuṇa āṭukam.”
               - naṟṟiṇai, 68:1-5
       29. “'paṇaittōṭ kuṟumakaḷ pāvai tai iyum
       pañcāyp paḷḷañ cūḻntu maṟṟivaḷ.”
               - - kuṟuntokai, 276:1-2
       30. “tātiṟ ceyta taṇpaṉip pāvai
       kālai varuntuṅ kaiyā ṟōmpeṉa
       orai yāyaṅ kūṟakkēṭṭum.”
               - - kuṟuntokai,, 48:1-3
       31. “uṟāa vaṟumulai maṭāa
       uṇṇāp pāvaiyai yūṭṭu vōḷē."
               - aiṅkuṟunūṟu, 128:2-3
       32. "cuṭarviri viṉaipāynta tūtaiyum pāvaiyum
       viḷaiyāṭa arippeyta aḻakamai puṉaiviṉai."
               - kalittokai, kuṟiñcikkali, 23:5-6
       33. “'vaiyeyiṟ ṟavarnāppaṇ vakaiyaṇip polintunī
       taiyil nī rāṭiya tavantalaip paṭuvāyō.'”
               -kalittokai, kuṟiñcikkali, 23:12-13
       34. “poytala makaḷaiyāyp piṟar maṉaip pāṭinī
       yeytiya palarkkītta payampayak kiṟpatō
       āytoṭi yaituyirt tivaṉuṇṇōy yāteṉṉum
       nōyilai yivaṭkeṉa notumalar paḻikkuṅkāl.”
               kalittokai, kuṟiñcikkali, 23.16- 19
       35. "pācava liṭitta karuṅkā *ḻulakkai
       āykatir nelliṉ varampaṇait tuyiṟṟi
       oṇṭoṭi makaḷir vaṇṭa layarum.”
               - - kuṟuntokai, 2.38:1.3
       36. “avaleṟinta vulakkai vāḻaic cērtti I
       vaḷaikkai makaḷir vaḷḷi koyyum.”
               patiṟṟuppattu, 29:1-2
       37. ceṟiyaric cilampiṟ kuṟuntoṭi makaḷir
       polañcey kaḻaṅkiṟ ṟeṟṟi yāṭum.'
               - puṟanāṉūṟu,, 36:3-4
       38. Naṛṛiņai; 79:2-3.
       39. kāmar kaṭumpuṉal kalantemmō ṭāṭuvāḷ
       tāmaraik kaṇ putaittañcit taḷarntataṉō ṭoḻukalāṉ.
       - kalittokai, mullaikkali, 3:1-2
       40. aṟivuṭai yōṉā ṟaracuñ cellum. aṟivu
               - puṟanāṉūṟu, 18347
       41. tōḻitāṉē cevili makaḷē."
               - tolkāppiyam, kaḷaviyal, 35
       42. Kuruntogai; 42:1-4.
       43. yāyā kiḻaḷē viḻavumuta lāṭṭi.”
               - - kuṟuntokai, 10:1
       44. ciṟumutu kuṟaivikkuc ciṟumaiyum ceytēṉ.'
               - cilappatikāram, kolaikkaḷakkātai, 68
       45. "oliyal vārmayir uḷariṉaḷ koṭicci
       peruvarai maruṅkiṟ kuṟiñci pāṭak
       kuraluṅ koḷḷātu nilaiyiṉum peyarātu
       paṭāap paiṅkaṇ pāṭupeṟ ṟoyyeṉa
       matampukal maḻakaḷiṟu uṟaṅkum nāṭaṉ.”
               akanāṉūṟu, 1 02:5-9
       46. 'āṟalai kaḷvar paṭaiviṭa varuḷiṉ
       māṟutalai peyarkku maruviṉ pālai."
               -perunāṟāṟṟuppaṭai, 21 -22
       47. "vēntuṟu viḻuman tāṅkiya
       pūmpoṟik kaḻaṟkā ṉeṭuntakai puṇṇē.'
               - puṟanāṉūṟu, 281:8-9
       48. koṭuvari pāynteṉak koḻunar mārpiṉ
       neṭuvaci viḻuppuṇ taṇimār kāppeṉa
       aṟalvāḻ kūntaṟ koṭicciyar pāṭal.”
               - malaipaṭukaṭām, 302-304
       49. ”ivaṉiva ḷaimpāl paṟṟavu mivaḷivaṉ
       puṉṟalai yōri vāṅkunaḷ pariyavum
       kātaṟ ceviliyar tavirppavun tavirātu
       ētil ciṟuceru vuṟupa maṉṉō
       nallaimaṉ ṟamma pālē melliyaṟ
       tuṇaimalarp piṇaiya laṉṉa vivar
       maṇamaki ḻiyaṟkai kāṭṭi yōyē..'
               - kuṟuntokai,, 229
       50. “yāyu ñāyum yārā kiyarō
       entaiyu nuntaiyu memmuṟaik kēḷir
       yāṉu nīyu mevvaḻi yaṟitum
       cempulap peyaṉīr pōla aṉpuṭai
       neñcan tāṅkalan taṉavē.”
               - kuṟuntokai,, 40
       51. "kuṉṟak kuṟavaṉ kātaṉ maṭamakaḷ
       vaṇṭupaṭu kūntaṟ ṟaṇṭaḻaik koṭicci
       vaṉaiyaḷ muḷaivā ḷeyiṟṟaḷ
       iḷaiya ḷāyiṉum āraṇaṅ kiṉaḷē.'
               aiṅkuṟunūṟu, 259
       52. 'kollēṟṟuk kōṭañcu vāṉai maṟumaiyum
       pullāḷē āya makaḷ.'
               - kalittokai, 103:63-64
       53. kollēṟu cāṭa iruntārkkem palliruṅ
       kūnta laṇaikeṭuppēm yām.'
               - mullaikkali, 1:41-42
       54. "muḻaṅkukaṭaṉ muḻaviṉ muciṟi yaṉṉa
       nalañcāl viḻupporuḷ paṇintuvantu koṭuppiṉum
       puraiya rallōr varaiyala ḷivaḷeṉat
       tantaiyuṅ koṭāṉ.
               - puṟanāṉūṟu, 383:10-13
       55. “arumaḻai taral vēṇṭil tarukiṟkum perumaiyaḷē”.'
               -- kalittokai, kuṟiñcikkali, 3, 6
       56. "teyvam toḻāaḷ koḻunaṉ toḻuteḻuvāḷ
       peyyeṉap peyyum maḻai.'
               - tirukkuṟaḷ, 55
       57. 'kāntaḷ kaṭikamaḻuṅ kaṇvāṅ kiruñcilampiṉ
       vāṅkamai meṉṟōṭ kuṟavar maṭamakaḷir
       tāmpiḻaiyār kēḷvart toḻuteḻalāṟ ṟammaiyarun
       tāmpiḻaiyār tāntoṭutta kōl.”
               --kalittokai, kuṟiñcikkali, 3:15-18
       58. "varimaṇaṉ muṉṉuṟaic ciṟṟil puṉainta
       tirunutal āyattār tammuṭ puṇarnta
       orumaṇan tāṉaṟiyu māyiṉ eṉaittun
       terumāl kaiviṭ ṭirukkē alarnta
       virinīr uṭukkai yulakam peṟiṉum
       aruneṟi āyar makaḷirkku
       irumaṇaṅ kūṭutal illiyal paṉṟē.
               - kalittokai mullaikkali, 14:15-21
       59. "āyar makaṉāyiṉ āyamakaḷ nīyāyiṉ
       niṉ veyya ṉāyiṉ avaṉveyyai nīyāyiṉ
       niṉṉainō takkatō illaimaṉ niṉneñcam
       aṉṉaineñ cākap peṟiṉ.”
               - kalittokai, mullaikkali, 7:20-23
       60. "akaliru vicumpiṉ mīṉiṉum
       palarē maṟaiviv vulakattup piṟarē.”
               - - kuṟuntokai,, 44:3-4
       61. "kaṟpuṅ kāmamum naṟpāl oḻukkamum
       melliyaṟ poṟaiyum niṟaiyum vallitiṉ
       viruntupuṟan tarutaluñ cuṟṟam ompalum
       piṟavum aṉṉa kiḻavōḷ māṇpukaḷ.”
               -tolkāppiyam, kaṟpiyal, 11
       62. "kātaloruvaṉaik kaippiṭittē yavaṉ
       kāriyaṅkaḷ yāviṉuṅ kaikoṭuttu
       mātaraṟaṅkaḷ paḻamaiyaik kāṭṭilum
       māṭcipeṟac ceytu vāḻvamaṭi.”
               - pāratiyār kavitaikaḷ, viṭutalaikkummi , 8
       63. "orumai makaḷirē pōlap perumaiyum
       taṉṉaittāṉ koṇṭoḻukiṉ uṇṭu.”
               - tirukkuṟaḷ, 974
       64. "maṉaittakka māṇpuṭaiyaḷ ākittaṟ koṇṭāṉ
       vaḷattakkāḷ vāḻkkait tuṇai.”
               - tirukkuṟaḷ, 51
       65. "vāḻi yātaṉ vāḻi yaviṉi
       vēntupakai taṇika yāṇṭupala nantuka
       eṉavēṭ ṭōḷē yāyē yāmē
       malarnta poykai mukainta tāmarait
       taṇṭuṟai yūraṉ varaika
       entaiyum koṭukka veṉavēṭ ṭēmē."
               - aiṅkuṟu nūṟu vēṭkaippattu, 6
       66. "īṇṭun talaiviyai yāyeṉṟatu etirppaṭṭa
       ñāṉṟē kaṟpup pūṇṭoḻukiniṉṟa ciṟappai nōkki"
               - aiṅkuṟu nūṟu paḻaiya urai
       67. Dr. V. SP. Manickam: Tamil-k-Kāthal:
       68. "kaṟpeṉap paṭuvatu karaṇamoṭu puṇarak
       koḷaṟkuri marapiṟ kiḻavaṉ kiḻattiyaik
       koṭaikkuri marapiṉōr koṭuppakkoḷ vatuvē.
               - tolkāppiyam, kaṟpiyal, 1
       69. "koṭuppōr iṉṟiyuṅ karaṇam uṇṭē
       puṇarntuṭaṉ pōkiya kālai yāṉa.”
               - tolkāppiyam, kaṟpiyal, 2
       70. "poyyum vaḻuvum tōṉṟiya piṉṉar
       aiyar yāttaṉar karaṇam eṉpa.”
               - tolkāppiyam, kaṟpiyal, 4
       71. ToIkäppiyam: Karpiyal- Ilampüranar Commentary.
       72. "uyiriṉuñ ciṟantaṉṟu nāṉē nāṇiṉuñ
       ceyirtīr kāṭcik kaṟpucciṟan taṉṟeṉat
       tollōr kiḷavi pulliya neñcamoṭu
       kāmak kiḻava ṉuḷ vaḻup paṭi ṉun
       tāvil naṉmoḻi kiḻavi kiḷappiṉum
       āvakai piṟavun tōṉṟumaṉ poruḷē.”
               -tolkāppiyam, kaḷaviyal , 22
       73. "peṇṇiṉ peruntakka yāvuḷa kaṟpeṉṉum
       tiṇmai uṇṭākap peṟiṉ.”
               - tirukkuṟaḷ, 54
       74. " iṉtuṇai makaḷik kiṉṟi yamaiyāk
       kaṟpukkaṭam pūṇṭa itteyva mallatu
       poṟpuṭait teyvam yāṅkaṇ ṭilamāl."
               - cilappatikāram, aṭaikkalakkātai, 142-144
       75. "nīriṉ ṟamaiyā vulakam pōlat
       tammiṉ ṟamaiyā nannayan taruḷi.”
               - naṟṟiṇai, 1:6-7
       76. "uṭampo ṭuyiriṭai eṉṉa maṟ ṟaṉṉa
       maṭantaiyo ṭemmiṭai naṭpu.”
               - tirukkuṟaḷ, 1122
       77. "viṉaiyē yāṭavark kuyirē vāṇutal
       maṉaiyuṟai makaḷirk kāṭava ruyireṉa."
       -         - - kuṟuntokai,, 135:1-2
       78. Kuruntokai-79.
       79. "aṉṉaiyu mattaṉu mallarō tōḻi
       pulaviyaḵ tevaṉō aṉpilaṅ kaṭaiyē."
               - - kuṟuntokai, 93:3-4
       80. "kālai yeḻuntu kaṭuntēr paṇṇi
       vāliḻai makaḷirt taḻīiya ceṉṟa
       malla lure ṉelliṉaṉ periteṉa
       maṟuvaruñ ciṟuvaṉ ṟāyē
       teṟuva tammavit tiṇaippiṟat tallē."
               - - kuṟuntokai, 45
       81. "cātal añcēṉ añcuval cāviṟ
       piṟappup piṟitā kuvatu āyiṉ
       maṟakkuvēṉ kolleṉ kātalaṉ eṉavē.”
               - naṟṟiṇai, 397
       82. "immai māṟi maṟumai yāyiṉum
       nīrā kiyayeṉ kaṇavaṉai
       yāṉā kiyarniṉ ṉeñcunēr pavaḷē.”
               - - kuṟuntokai, 49:3-5
       83. "pōṟṟā voḻukkam purintīr yāvatum
       māṟṟā uḷḷa vāḻkkaiyē ṉātaliṉ
       ēṟṟeḻun taṉaṉyāṉ...... ...”
               - cilappatikāram, kolaikkaḷak kātai, 81-83
       84. "cēkkai iṉiyārpāṟ celvāṉ maṉaiyāḷāṟ
       kākkai kaṭintoḻukal kūṭumō kūṭā
       takavuṭai maṅkaiyar cāṉṟāṇmai cāṉṟār
       ikaḻiṉuṅ kēḷvarai yētti iṟaiñcuvār.”
               - paripāṭal , 20;86-89
       85. "piracaṅ kalanta veṇcuvait tīmpāl
       virikatirp poṟkalattu orukai ēntip
       puṭaippiṉ cuṟṟum pūntalaic ciṟukōl
       uṇṇeṉṟu okkupu puṭaippat teṇṇīr
       muttarip poṉcilampu olippat tattuṟṟu
       arinaraik kūntal cemmutu ceviliyar
       parimelin toḻiyap pantar oṭi
       ēval maṟukkuñ ciṟuviḷai yāṭṭi
       aṟivum oḻukkamum yāṇṭuṇarn taṉaḷkol
       koṇṭa koḻunaṉ kuṭivaṟaṉ uṟṟeṉak
       koṭutta tantai koḻuñcōṟu uḷḷāḷ
       oḻukunīr nuṇaṅkaṟal pōlap
       poḻutumaṟuttu uṇṇuñ ciṟumatu kaiyaḷē.”
               - naṟṟiṇai, 1 10
       86. "aṉṉāy vāḻivēṇ ṭaṉṉai nam paṭappai
       tēṉ mayaṅku pāliṉu miṉiya vavarnāṭ
       ṭuvalaik kūvaṟ kīḻa
       māṉuṇ ṭeñciya kaliḻi nīrē.”
               - aiṅkuṟunūṟu, 203
       87. “akaḻvārait tāṅkum nilampōlat tammai
       ikaḻvārp poṟuttal talai."
               - tirukkuṟaḷ, 151
       88. "tāyuṭaṉ ṟalaikkuṅ kālaiyum vāyviṭ
       ṭaṉṉā yeṉṉum kuḻavi pōla
       iṉṉā ceyiṉu miṉitutalai yaḷippiṉum
       niṉvaraip piṉaḷeṉ ṟōḻi
       taṉṉuṟu viḻumaṅ kaḷaiñarō vilaḷē.”
               - - kuṟuntokai,, 397:4.8
       89. "aṉpuṭaik kaṇava raḻitakac ceyiṉum
       peṇpiṟan tōrkkup poṟaiyē perumai."
               - peruṅkatai, 4, 14 (98-99)
       90. “viṟperun taṭakkai vīra vīṅkunī rilaṅkai veṟpiṉ
       naṟperun tavatta ḷāya naṅkaiyaik kaṇṭē ṉallēṉ
       iṟpiṟap peṉpatoṉṟu mirumpoṟai yeṉpatoṉṟum
       kaṟpeṉum peyara toṉṟuṅ kaḷinaṭam puriyak kaṇṭēṉ.”
               - kampa irāmāyaṇam, cuntara kāṇṭam, toluṭaiya paṭalam
       91. "aṉṉai tayaiyum aṭiyāḷ paṇiyum
       malarp poṉṉiṉ eḻilum puvippoṟaiyum
       vaṉṉavuṭal vēcittuyilum, viṟal mantiri aṟivum
       pēcil ivaiyuṭaiyāḷ peṇ.”
       92. "kaṭkiṇiyāḷ, kātalaṉ kātal vakaipuṉaivāḷ
       uṭkuṭaiyāḷ, ūrnāṇ iyalpiṉāḷ-uṭki
       iṭaṉaṟin tuṭi iṉitiṉ uṇarum
       maṭamoḻi mātarāḷ peṇ.”
               - nālaṭiyār, 384
       93. “niṟaiyum maṟaipulap paṭāmai niṟukkum
       neñcuṭaimaiyum.”
               - tolkāppiyam, kaḷappiyal, nacciṉārkiṉiyar urai
       94. "yāyā kiyaḷē māa yōḷē
       maṭaimāṇ ceppiṟ ṟamiya vaikiya
       peyyāp pūviṉ meycā yiṉaḷē
       pācaṭai nivanta kaṇaikkā ṉeytal
       iṉamī ṉiruṅkaḻi yōta malkutoṟum
       kayamūḻku makaḷir kaṇṇiṉ māṉum
       taṇṇan tuṟaivaḷ koṭumai
       nammu ṉāṇik karappā ṭummē.”
               - kuṟuntokai, 9
       95. "yāyā kiyaḷē viḻavumuta lāṭṭi
       payaṟupō liṇarap paintātu paṭīiyar
       uḻavar vāṅkiya kamaḻpū meṉciṉaik
       kāñci yūraṉ koṭumai
       karantaṉa ḷākali ṉāṇiya varumē.”
               - kuṟuntokai , 10
       96. "viruntē tāṉum
       putuvatu puṉainta yāppiṉ mēṟṟē.”
               - tolkāppiyam, ceyyuḷiyal, 231
       97. "maṟapparum kēṇmaiyō ṭaṟappari cāramum
       viruntupuṟan tarūum peruntaṇ vāḻkkaiyum.”
               - cilappatikāram, maṉaiyaṟam paṭutta kātai, 85-86
       98. "aṟavōrk kaḷittalum antaṇa rōmpalum
       tuṟavōrk ketirtalum tollōr ciṟappiṉ
       viruntetir kōṭalum iḻanta eṉṉai.”
               - cilappatikāram, kolaikkaḷak kātai, 71-73
       99. "viruntu kaṇṭapō teṉṉuṟumō veṉṟu vimmum.”
               - kampa irāmāyaṇam, cuntara kāṇṭam, kāṭcip paṭalam , 15
       100. "allil āyiṉum viruntuvariṉ uvakkum
       mullai cāṉṟa kaṟpiṉ
       melliyal kuṟumakaḷ uṟaiviṉ ūrē."
               - naṟṟiṇai, 142, 9-11
       101. "palarpuku vāyi laṭaippak kaṭavutar
       varuvī ruḷīrō veṉavum
       vārār tōḻinaṅ kāta lōrē...”
               - kuṟuntokai, 1 18:2-5
       102. "varunarkku varaiyā vaḷanakar poṟpa
       malarat tiṟanta vāyil palaruṇa.”
               - kuṟiñcippāṭṭu, 202-3
       103. "ulakupukat tiṟanta vāyiṟ
       palarō ṭuṇṭal marīi yōṉē.”
               - puṟanāṉūṟu, 234:5-9
       104. Nambiyakaporul: Akatinaiyiyal.
       105. ToIkäppiyam: Karpiyal-11, Commentary- Naccinarkkiniyar.
       106. "muḷitayir picainta kāntaṇ melviral
       kaḻuvuṟu kaliṅkaṅ kaḻāa tuṭīik
       kuvaḷai yuṇkaṇ kuyppukai kamaḻat
       tāṉṟuḻan taṭṭa tīmpuḷip pākar
       iṉiteṉak kaṇava ṉuṇṭaliṉ
       nuṇṇitiṉ makiḻntaṉ ṟoṇṇutaṉ mukaṉē.”
               - kuṟuntokai, 167
       107. “uṇṭaṉaṉ uṇṇak kaṇṭa
       nakaimuttō uvappai uṇṭāḷ.”
               - kuṭumpa viḷakku, pākam 3
       108. "aruntu mellaṭaku āriṭa varuntumeṉ ṟaḻuṅkum."
               - kampa irāmāyaṇam, cuntara kāṇṭam, kāṭcip paṭalam -15:1
       109. “ēṉatu cuvaippiṉu nīkai toṭṭatu
       vāṉō ramutam puraiyumā lemakkeṉa
       aṭicilum pūvun toṭutaṟ kaṇṇum.’’
               - tolkāppiyam, kaṟpiyal, 5
       110. ‘'vēmpiṉ paiṅkāyeṉ ṟōḻi tariṉē
       tēmpūṅ kaṭṭi yeṉṟaṇi riṉiyē.”
               - kuṟuntokai, 196:1-2
       111. Tiruveňgaikkövai: 403.
       112. Tolkāppiyam, Purattinaiyiyal 4.
       Ilampüranar's commentary.
       113. "keṭuka cintai kaṭitivaḷ tuṇivē
       mūtiṉ makaḷi rātal takumē
       mēṉā luṟṟa ceruviṟ kivaḷtaṉṉai
       yāṉai yeṟintu kaḷattoḻin taṉaṉē
       neṭuna luṟṟa ceruviṟ kivaḷkoḻunaṉ
       perunirai vilaṅki yāṇṭuppaṭ ṭaṉaṉē
       iṉṟum, ceruppaṟai kēṭṭu viruppuṟṟu mayaṅki
       vēlkaik koṭuttu veḷituvirit tuṭīip
       pāṟumayirk kuṭumi yeṇṇey nīvi
       orumaka ṉalla tillōḷ
       cerumuka nōkkic celkeṉa viṭumē.”
               - puṟanāṉūṟu, 279
       114. "maṉaikkuviḷak kākiya vāṇutal.”
               - puṟanāṉūṟu, 314:1
       115. "maṉaikku viḷakkam maṭavāḷ.”
               - nāṉmaṇikkaṭikai, 1 05:1
       116. "maṉaikkuppāḻ vāḷnuta liṉmaitāṉ.”
               - nāṉmaṇikkaṭikai, 22:1
       117. "pukaḻpurin tillilōrk killai ikaḻvārmuṉ
       ēṟupōl pīṭu naṭai."
               - tirukkuṟaḷ, 656
       118. "illateṉ illavaḷ māṇpāṉāl.”
               -Tirukkural, 52
       119. "maṅkalam eṉpa maṉaimāṭci"
               -tirukkuṟaḷ, 60
       120. "oṉṟaṉkū ṟāṭai yuṭuppavarē yāyiṉum
       oṉṟiṉār vāḻkkaiyē vāḻkkai.”
               - kalittokai pālaikkali, 18:9-11
       121. "irutalaip puḷḷiṉ oruyi rammē."
               - akanāṉūṟu; 12:5
       122. "aruvaraic cērāt toḻunar
       kaṉaviṟ ṟoṭṭatu kaipiḻai yākātu
       naṉaviṟ cēēppaniṉ ṉaḷipuṉal vaiyai
       varupuṉal aṇikeṉa varaṅkoḷ vōrum
       karuvayi ṟuṟukeṉak kaṭampaṭu vōrum
       ceyporuḷ vāykkeṉac cevicārttu vōrum
       aiyama raṭukeṉa varuccip pōrum.”
               - paripāṭal, 8:102
       123. "tiṇkatir matāṇi yoṇkuṟu mākkaḷai
       ompiṉart taḻi it tāmpuṇarttu muyaṅkit
       tātaṇi tāmaraip pōtupiṭit tāṅkut
       tāmu mavarum orāṅku viḷaṅkak
       kāmar kaviṉiya pēriḷam peṇṭir
       pūviṉar pukaiyiṉar toḻuviṉar paḻiccic
       ciṟantupuṟaṅ kākkuṅ kaṭavuṭ paḷḷi.”
               - maturaikkāñci, 461-467
       124. "nilattiṉum peritē vāṉiṉu muyarntaṉṟu
       nīriṉu māraḷa viṉṟē cāraṟ
       karuṅkōṟ kuṟiñcip pūkkoṇṭu
       peruntē viḻaikku nāṭaṉoṭu naṭpē.”
               - kuṟuntokai, 3
       125. "orāṉ valcic cīril vāḻkkai
       perunalak kuṟumakaḷ vanteṉa
       iṉiviḻa vāyiṟ ṟeṉṉu mivvūrē.”
               - kuṟuntokai , 265:4-6
       126. "yāṇṭupala vāka naraiyila vākutal
       yāṅkā kiyareṉa viṉavuti rāyiṉ
       māṇṭaveṉ maṉaiviyoṭu makkaḷu nirampiṉar.”
               - puṟanāṉūṟu, 191:1-3
       127. "immaip piṟappil piriyalam eṉṟēṉāk
       kaṇniṟai nīrkoṇ ṭaṉaḷ.”
               - tirukkuṟaḷ, 1315
       128. "peruntōṭ kaṇavaṉ māynteṉa varumpaṟa
       vaḷḷita ḻaviḻnta tāmarai
       naḷḷirum poykaiyun tīyumō raṟṟē.”
               - puṟanāṉūṟu, 246:13-15
       129. "kātala riṟappiṟ kaṉaiyeri potti
       ūtulaik kurukiṉ uyirttakat taṭaṅkātu
       iṉṉuyi rīvar īyā rāyiṉ
       naṉṉīrp poykaiyiṉ
       naḷiyeri pukuvar naḷiyeri pukāa rāyiṉ aṉparōṭu
       uṭaṉuṟai vāḻkkaikku nōṟṟuṭam paṭuvar.”
               - maṇimēkalai, 21 42-47
       130. "kaṇavaṉai yiḻantōrkkuk kāṭṭuvatil."
               - cilappatikāram, vaḻakkurai kātai, 80
       131. "oruṅkuṭaṉ māynta peṇṭirk kāyiṉum
       ….. …… ….. …… …..
       cuṭumaṇ ōṅkiya neṭunilaik kōṭṭam."
               - maṇimēkalai, 6:55-59
       132. "uṭaṉvīḻn taṉṟā lamarē peṇṭirum
       pācaṭaku micaiyār paṉinīr mūḻkār
       mārpakam porunti yāṅkamain taṉarē...”
               - puṟanāṉūṟu, 62:13-15
       133. Puranāņūru : 240
       134. Periya Puránam-Tirunavukkarasu Náyanár Puránam.
       135. M. E. R.
       136. M. E. R.
       137. "paruttip peṇṭiṉ paṉuva laṉṉa.”
               - puṟanāṉūṟu, 125
       138. "āḷil peṇṭir tāḷiṉ ceyta
       nuṇaṅkunuṇ paṉuval pōla.”
               -Narriņai, 353
       139. "kaḻikala makaḷir pōla
       vaḻiniṉain tirutta lataṉiṉu maritē."
               - puṟanāṉūṟu, 289:14-15
       140. puṟanāṉūṟu, 25, 250, 26 1, 280
       141. - Folklore in the Old Testament, Part I., P. 377 .
       142. “A virtuous woman is a crown to her husband."
       -         Old Testament, Proverbs., XII. 4
       143. ‘’Wife's are young men's mistresses
       companion for middle age and old men's nurses".
       - Francis Bacon. In Marriage and Simple Life
       144. “All other good by Fortune’s hands are given
       A wife is the peculiar gift of heaven".
               —Рope: January and Мау
       145. “O Woman! lovely Woman! Nature made thee to tempər man;
       we had seen brutes without you".
               -Otway, Venice Preserved. I-1
       146. “Giving honour unto the wife; as unto
       the weaker vessel."
               —New Testament, I. Peter. Il-7
       147. "cellāṉ kiḻavaṉ iruppiṉ nilampulan
       tillāḷiṉ ūṭi liṭum.”
               -tirukkuṟaḷ, 1039
       148. "illateṉ illavaḷ māṇpāṉāl uḷḷateṉ illavaḷ māṇāk kaṭai.”
               -tirukkuṟaḷ, 53
       149. Avvaiyār, Tanippādal Tirațtu, Part 1. P. 63.
       Notes : Part II
       1 “Being Dravidian, the inhabitants of Mohanjo-Daro and Northern
       India, naturally spoke of a Dravidian Language.”
               - Rev. Fr., Heras, Light on the Mohanjo Daro Riddle, 1
       2. Pura-p-porul Venbã mālai, Karantaippatalam, 14
       3. V. Kanagasabai Pillai, The Tamil Eighteen Hundred Years Age, p.
       120
       4. K. A. Nilakanta Sastri. Tamilar Paņpāțum Varalārum,” p. 115
       5. T. V. Kalyana Sundaranar, “Peņņiņ Perumal, (or) Vālkkaittuņai”
       p. 39-40
       6. Dr. M. Varadarajan. “Peņmai Vāļka,' p. 11-12
       7. Dr. V. Sp. Manickam. - “Tamilkkātal,' p. 152
       8. Dr. K. K. Pillai, 'A Social History of the Tamils,’ Part I, p.
       385
       9. Dr. N. Subramaniyam. -“Sangam Polity," p. 285
       10. Dr. N. Subramaniyam, -"Journal of Indian History", Vol.
       XXXVIII, Part 1, April 1960, Serial No: 112, Page 487
       11. Jawaharlal Nehru.
               —"The Discovery of India.’ p. 107
       12. K. Gnanambal,
               - "Home life among the Tamils in Sangam age.’ p. 107
       13. 'piṟappē kuṭimai āṇmai yāṇṭōṭu
       uruvu niṟutta kāma vāyil
       niṟaiyē yaruḷē uṇarvoṭu tiruveṉa
       muṟaiyuṟak kiḷanta oppiṉatu vakaiyē.”
       -         tolkāppiyam, meypppāṭṭiyal 25
       14. “oṉṟē vēṟē eṉṟiru pālvayiṉ
       oṉṟi uyarnta pāla tāṇaiyiṉ
       otta kiḻavaṉuṅ kiḻattiyuṅ kāṇpa
       mikkō ṉāyiṉuṅ kaṭivarai yiṉṟē.' o
               -tolkāppiya, kaḷaviyal , 2
       14A. Dr. V. Sp. Manickam, - *Tamil-k-kātail," p. 152
       15. Dr. M. Varadarajan, -“Peņmai Vālka,' p. 26
       16. Dr. M. Varadarajan, - "Peņmai Vālka" p. 25
       17. aṇṇān tēntiya vaṉamulai taḷariṉum
       poṉṉēr mēṉi maṇiyiṟ ṟāḻnta
       naṉṉeṭuṅ kūntal naraiyoṭu muṭippiṉum
       nītta lōmpumati pūkkē mūra!
               - naṟṟiṇai, 10:1-4
       18. ‘putumalar alla; kāynta
               puṟkaṭṭē avaḷ uṭampu
       catirāṭum naṭaiyāḷ allaḷ
               taḷḷāṭi viḻum mūtāṭṭi
       matiyalla mukam avaṭku
               vaṟaḷ nilam; kuḻikaḷ kaṇkaḷ
       etu eṉakku iṉpam nalkum -
               irukkiṉṟāḷ' eṉpatoṉṟē.”
               - pāratitācaṉ kuṭumpa viḷakku, mutiyōr kātal
       19. 'perumaiyum uraṉum āṭuu mēṉa.”
               - tolkāppiyam, kaḷaviyal. 7
       20. Tolkáppiyam, Kalaviyal, 7 Commentary.
       21. ToIkáppiyam, Kalaviyal, 8 Commentary.
       22. uyiriṉuñ ciṟantaṉṟu nāṇē nāṇiṉuñ
       ceyir tīr kāṭcik caṟpucciṟan taṉṟeṉa.”
               -tolkāppiyam, kaḷaviyal , 22, 1.2
       23. ceṟivum niṟaiyuñ cemmaiyuñ ceppum
       vampaiyum peṇpā laṉa.” H aṟivum aru
               -tolkāppiyam, poruḷiyal, 15
       24. akattuṟai ilakkiyaṅkaḷil ellām ulakilēyē
       oppaṟṟu viḷaṅkuvatu tamiḻil uḷḷa
       akattuṟai ilakkiyamē.”
               -aṟiñar taṉi nāyaka aṭikaḷār, tamiḻttūtu, p. 44
       25. peṇṇiṉ iyalpai cēkspiyarait tavira
       vēṟu evarēṉum aṟivareṉak kūṟuvāreṉiṉ
       avar aṟivilar aṉṟēl pēraṟiñar eṉpa.'
               - aṟiñar taṉi nāyaka aṭikaḷār, tamiḻttūtu, p. 46
       26. Dr. V. Sp. Manickam, The Tamil Concept of Love, pp. 317-318.
       27. aṟattoṭu niṉṟēṉaik kaṇṭu tiṟappaṭa
       eṉṉaiyark kuytturaittāḷ yāy;
       avarun, terikaṇai nōkkic cilai nōkkik kaṇcēn
       torupaka lellām urutteḻun tāṟi
       iruvarkaṭ kuṟṟamum illaiyāl eṉṟu
       mantu cāyttār talai; terumantu tatāā ta
               - kalittokai, kuṟiñcikkali, 3:20-25
       28. .......... tuṟaivarkku
       urimai ceppiṉar namarē...... H H
               - kuṟuntokai 351:4-5
       29. Dr. U. V Swaminatha Aiyar, Kuruntokai, 351, Commentary.
               - kuṟuntokai
       30. 'amma vāḻi tōḻi nammūrp
       pirintōrp puṇarppō riruntaṉar kollō
       taṇṭuṭaik kaiyar veṇṭalaic citalavar
       naṉṟunaṉ ṟeṉṉu mākkaḷō
       ṭiṉṟuperi teṉṉu māṅkaṇa tavaiyē.”
               - kuṟuntokai. 146
       31. kālē paritap piṉavē kaṇṇē
       nōkki nōkki vāḷiḻan taṉavē
       akaviru vicumpiṉ mīṉiṉum
       palarē maṉṟaviv vulakattup piṟarē.”
               -kuṟuntokai , 44
       32. kalittokai, pālaikkali, 8.
       33. Dr. V. Sp, Manickam, The Tamil Concept of Love, p. 318.
       34. ekkar ñāḻaṉ malariṉ makaḷir
       oṇṭaḻai yayarun tuṟaivaṉ
       taṇṭaḻai vilaiyeṉa nalkiṉaṉ nāṭē."
       35. vilaivēṇṭā remmiṉat tāyar makaḷir
       kolaiyēṟṟuk kōṭṭiṭait tām vīḻvār mārpiṉ
       mulaiyiṭaip pōlap pukiṉ.”
               - kalittokai, mullaikkali, 371 -73
       36. akanāṉūṟu, 280 Et 390.
       37. …. … ...āytoṭik kuṟumakaḷ
       nalañcāl viḻupporuḷ kalaniṟai koṭuppiṉum
       peṟalaruṅ kuraiya ḷāyiṉ..... .”
               - akanāṉūṟu, 280, 4-6
       38. "orāṉ valcic ciril vāḻkkai
       perunalak kuṟumakaḷ vanteṉa
       iṇiviḻa vāyiṟ ṟeṉṉumiv vūrē.”
               -kuṟuntokai , 265:4-6
       39. "muḻaṅkukaṭaṉ muḻaviṉ muciṟi yaṉṉa
       nalañcāl viḻupporuḷ paṇintuvantu koṭuppiṉum
       puraiyarallōr varaiyala ḷivaḷeṉat
       tantaiyuṅ koṭāa ṉāyiṉ vantōr.”
               -puṟanāṉūṟu 343:10-13
       40. (1) naṟṟiṇai: 393; 10, namar koṭai nērntaṉar”
       (2) aiṅkuṟunūṟu: 300; 2-3
       *añciṟai virikkum peruṅkal veṟpaṉ
       vantaṉa ṉetirntaṉar koṭaiyē.”
       (3) akanāṉūṟu:282; 13-"entaiyum etirntaṉam koṭaiyē.’’
       41. nilattiṉum peritē vāṉiṉu muyarntaṉṟu
       nīriṉu māraḷa viṉṟē cāraṟ
       karuṅkōṟ kuṟiñcip pūk koṇṭu
       peruntē ṉiḻaikku nāṭaṉoṭu naṭpē.
               - kuṟuntokai, 3
       42. kuṟuntāṭ kūtaḷi yāṭiya neṭuvaraip
       peruntēṉ kaṇṭa viruṅkai muṭavaṉ
       uṭkaic ciṟukuṭai kōlik kīḻiruntu
       cuṭṭupu nakki yāṅkuk kātalar
       nalkār nayavā rāyiṉum
       palkāṟ kāṇṭalu muḷḷattuk kiṉitē.
               - kuṟuntokai 60
       43. vāruṟu vaṉarkatup puḷarip puṟañcērpu
       aḻāa leṉṟunam maḻutakaṇ ṭuṭaippār
       yārā kuvarkol tōḻi.'
               - kuṟuntokai, 82:1-3
       44. "pūviṭaip paṭiṉum yāṇṭukaḻin taṉṉa
       nīruṟai makaṉṟiṟ puṇarcci pōlap
       pirivari tākiya taṇṭāk kāmamo
       ṭuṭaṉuyir pōkuka tilla kaṭaṉaṟin
       tiruvē mākiya vulakat
       toruvē mākiya puṉmainā muyaṟkē.”
               - kuṟuntokai, 57
       45. 'umaṇar cērntu kaḻinta maruṅki ṉakaṉṟalai
       ūrpāḻt taṉṉa vōmaiyam peruṅkāṭu
       iṉṉā veṉṟi rāyiṉ
       iṉiyavō peruma tamiyōrkku maṉaiyē.'
               - kuṟuntokai, 124
       46. 'viṉaiyē yāṭavark kuyirē vāṇutal
       maṉaiyuṟai makaḷirk kāṭava ruyireṉa
       namakkurait tōrun tāmē
       aḻāa ṟōḻi yaḻuṅkuvar celavē.”
               - kuṟuntokai 135
       47. ‘'vēral vēli vērkkōṭ palaviṉ
       cāra ṉāṭa cevviyai yākumati
       yāraḵ taṟintici ṉōrē cāraṟ
       ciṟukōṭṭup perumpaḻan tūṅki yāṅkivaḷ
       uyir tavac ciṟitu kāmamō peritē
               - kuṟuntokai, 18
       48. “mālvarai yiḻitarun tuveḷ ḷaruvi
       kaṉmukait tatumpum paṉmalarc cāraṟ
       ciṟukuṭik kuṟavaṉ peruntōṭ kuṟumakaḷ
       nīrō raṉṉa cāyal
       tīyō raṉṉaveṉ ṉuraṇavit taṉṟē.'
               - kuṟuntokai, 95
       49. "kaṭal cūḻ maṇṭilam peṟiṉum
       viṭalcūḻa laṉā ṉiṉṉuṭai naṭpē.”
               - kuṟuntokai, 300:7-8
       50. ellā mevaṉō pataṭi vaikal
       pāṇar paṭumalai paṇṇiya veḻāliṉ
       vāṉat teḻuñcuvar nallicai vīḻap
       peyta pulattup pūtta mullaip
       pacumukait tātu nāṟu naṟunutal
       arivai tōḷiṇait tuñcik
       kaḻinta nāḷivaṇ vāḻu nāḷē.
               - kuṟuntokai , 323
       51. "orunāḷ puṇarap puṇariṉ
       araināḷ vāḻkkaiyum vēṇṭalaṉ yāṉē.”
               -kuṟuntokai , 280:4-5
       52. 'muṭṭāc ciṟappiṉ paṭṭiṉam peṟiṉum
       vāriruṅ kūntal vayaṅkiḻai yoḻiya
       vārēṉ vāḻiya neñcē."
               -paṭṭiṉappālai, 218-20
       53. (1) aṉṟai yaṉṉa naṭpiṉaṉ.”
               - kuṟuntokai 385:6
       (2) talaināḷ aṉṉa pēṇalaṉ'
               - naṟṟiṇai 332:8
       (3) taṇṭāk kātalum talaināḷ pōṉmē”
               - akanāṉūṟu, 332:15
       (4) aṉṟai yaṉṉa viruppōṭu”
               - kuṟiñcippāṭṭu, 238
       54. "pāṇmakaṉ
       eṇṇumuṟai niṟuttayāḻ paṇṇiṉuḷḷum
       putuvatu puṉainta tiṟattiṉum
       vatuvai nāḷiṉum iṉiyaṉāl emakkē.”
               - akanāṉūṟu, 352:16-17
       55. “tiṟavāk kaṇṇa cāycevik kuruḷai
       kaṟavāp pālmulai kavartal nōṉātu
       puṉiṟṟunāy kuraikkum pulleṉ aṭṭil
       kāḻcōr mutucuvark kaṇaccita laritta
       pūḻi pūtta puḻaṟkā ḷāmpi
       olkupaci uḻanta oṭuṅkutuṉa matukula
       iḷaikkaik kiṇaimakaḷ vaḷḷukirk kuṟaitta
       kuppai vēḷai uppili ventatai
       iṭavōr kāṭci nāṇik kaṭaiyaṭaittu
       irumpōr okkalo ṭoruṅkuṭaṉ micaiyum.”
               - ciṟupāṇāṟṟupppaṭai, 13-139 56.
       56. "tuṉṉaruṅ kāṉamun tuṇita lāṟṟāy
       piṉṉiṉṟu peyarac cūḻntaṉai yāyi
       ṉeṉṉilai yuraimō neñcē."
               - akanāṉūṟu, 181 : 1-3
       57. aṭaṅkiya kaṟpi ṉāynutaṉ maṭantai
       uyar nilai yulaka mavaṉpuka vāra.'
               - puṟanāṉūṟu 249:10-11
       58. āṟiya kaṟpi ṉaṭaṅkiya cāyal
       ūṭiṉu miṉiya kūṟu miṉṉakai
       amirtu potituvar vāyamartta nōkkiṟ
       cuṭarnuta lacai naṭai yuḷḷalu muriyaḷ.
               - patiṟṟuppattu, 2:6:10-13
       59. maṅkala makaḷiroṭu marlai cūṭṭi.”
               - puṟanāṉūṟu 332:5
       60. :ceṉṟataṟ koṇṭu maṉaiyōḷ virumpi.”
               - puṟanāṉūṟu 333:8
       61. niḻaliṉum pōkāniṉ veḷyōḷ payanta.”
               - puṟanāṉūṟu , 222:2
       62. vacaiyil makaḷir.'
               - patiṟṟuppattu, 12:23
       63. melliyal makaḷir.”
               - patiṟṟuppattu, 40-23
       64. cēyiḻai makaḷir.'
               -patiṟṟuppattu , 43:2
       65. vaṭamīṉpōl toḻutētta vayaṅkiya kaṟpiṉāḷ.'
               kalittokai, pālaikkali, 1:21
       66. Kalitiokai Corpolivukaļ. p. 63-64.
       67. “ .......tammai
       varukeṉṟār yārkolō īṅku.
               kalittokai, marutakkali, 20:30-31
       68. "toṭiya emakkunī yārai periyārk
       kaṭiyarō āṟṟā tavar.”
               - kalittokai, marutakkali , 23:3-4
       69. "yārivaṉ eṅkūntal koḷvāṉ ituvumōr
       ūrāṇmaik kotta paṭiṟuṭait temmaṉai
       vāralnī vantāṅkē māṟu."
               - marutakkali , 24:1-3
       70. 'yārai nī pemmil pukutarvā yōrum
       putuva malartērum vaṇṭē pōl yāḻa
       vatuvai viḻavaṇi vaikalum kāṭṭiṉaiyāy.”
               - marutakkali , 33:1-3
       71. "teṟuva tammavit tiṇaippiṟat tallē."
               -kuṟuntokai , 45:5
       72. Akanāņūru. 190:12
       73. 'vaṭamīṉ pōl toḻutētta vayaṅkiya kaṟpiṉāḷ.'
               -kalittokai, pālaikkali, 1:21
       74. Bharathiyar Kavithaikal, Peņkaļ vitutalaik kummi.
       75. 'palliruṅ kūntaṉ makaḷir
       ollā muyakkiṭaik kuḻaikaveṉ ṟārē.”
               - puṟanāṉuṟu, 73:13-14
       76. 'maṭaṅkaliṟ ciṉai.i maṭaṅkā vuḷḷat
       taṭaṅkāt tāḷai vēnta ruṭaṅkiyain
       teṉṉoṭu porutu meṉpa vavarai
       ārama ralaṟat tākkit tēro
       ṭavarppuṟaṅ kāṇē ṉāyiṟ ciṟanta
       pērama ruṇka ṉivaḷiṉum pirika.”
               - puṟanāṉuṟu, 71:1 -6
       77. puṟanāṉuṟu. 246
       78. "karuṅkaṭ ṭākkalai perumpiṟi tuṟṟeṉak
       kaimmai yuyyāk kāmar manti
       kallā vaṉpaṟaḻ kiḷaimutaṟ cērtti
       ōṅkuvarai yaṭukkattup pāyntuyir cekukkum
       cāra ṉāṭa naṭu nāḷ
       vāral vāḻiyō varuntutum yāmē."
               -kuṟuntokai, 69
       79. :akalam makaḷirk kallatu malarppaṟi yalaiyē.”
               -patiṟṟuppattu, 713; 4-5
       80 :piṟaṉ maṉai nōkkāta pērāṇmai cāṉṟōrkku
       aṟaṉoṉ ṟō āṉṟa voḻukku.”
               -tirukkuṟaḷ, 148
       81. aṉpakat tillā uyirvāḻkkai vaṉpāṟkaṇ
       vaṟṟal marantaḷirt taṟṟu.' ão
               -tirukkuṟaḷ, 78
       82. puṟanāṉūṟu 143.
       83. puṟanāṉūṟu, 1448 145.
       84. puṟanāṉūṟu, 146.
       85. puṟanāṉūṟu, 147.
       86. maṉaivi uyarvuṅ kiḻavōṉ paṇivum
       niṉaiyuṅ kālaip pulaviyu ḷuriya.”
               - tolkāppiyam, poruḷiyal, 31
       87. marutaikkāñci , 23.
       88. tañcai vāṇaṉ kōvai, 398.
       89. 'kaḻaṉi māttu viḷaintuku tīmpaḻam
       paḻaṉa vāḷai katu u mūraṉ
       emmiṟ perumoḻi kūṟit tammiṟ
       kaiyuṅ kālun tuākkat tuākkum
       āṭip pāvai pōla
       mēvaṉa ceyyun taṉ putalvaṉ tāykkē.'
               -kuṟuntokai 8
       90. “añca vanta urimaik kaṇṇum.”
               - tolkāppiyam, kaṟpiyal, 54
       91. eṇṇarum pācaṟaip peṇṇoṭu puṇarār.
               -tolkāppiyam, kaṟpiyal, 131
       92. āvu māṉiyaṟ pārppaṉa mākkaḷum
       peṇṭirum piṇiyuṭai yīrum pēṇit
       teṉpula vāḻnark karuṅkaṭa ṉiṟukkum
       poṉpōṟ putalvarp peṟāa tirum
       emmampu kaṭiviṭutu nummaraṇ cērmiṉeṉa
       aṟattāṟu tuvalum pūṭkai maṟam.'
               - puṟanāṉūṟu, 91 1-6
       93. pārppār aṟavōr pacuppat tiṇippeṇṭir
       mūttōr kuḻavi yeṉumivaraik kaiviṭṭut
       tīttiṟattār pakkamē cērkeṉṟu kāyttiya
       poṟṟoṭi ēvap pukaiyaḻal maṇṭiṟṟē.”
               - cilappatikāram, vañciṉa mālai, 53-56
       94. 'kaḷḷiṟ kēḷi rāttirai yuḷḷurp
       pāḷai tanta pañciyaṅ kuṟuṅkāy
       ōṅkirum peṇṇai nuṅkoṭu peyarum
       āti yarumaṉ mūtuāraṉṉa
       ayaveḷ ḷāmpa lampakai neṟittamai
       tittik kuṟaṅki ṉuāḻmā ṟalaippa.'
               -kuṟuntokai 293:1-6
       95. Puranänüru, 151: Commentary.
       96. “makiḻnaṉ mārpē veyyai yāṉi
       aḻiyal vāḻi tōḻi naṉṉaṉ
       naṟumā koṉṟu nāṭṭiṟ pōkiya
       oṉṟu moḻik kōcar pōla
       vaṉkaṭ cūḻcciyum vēṇṭumāṟ ciṟitē."
               - kuṟuntokai 73
       97. "ettiṇai maruṅkiṉum makaṭūu maṭaṟmēl
       poṟpuṭai marapiṉ iṉṭiai yāṉa.”
               - tolkāppiyam, akattiṇaiyiyal, 35
       98. munnīr vaḻakkam makaṭuvō_ṭillai.'
               -tolkāppiyam, akattiṇaiyiyal 34
       99. maṅkalam eṉpa maṉaimāṭci maṟṟataṉ
       naṉkalam naṉmakkaṭ pēṟu.
               - tirukkuṟaḷ, 60
       100. akanāṉūṟu 184
       101. naṟṟiṇai, 330.
       102. kalittokai , 86.
       103. akanāṉūṟu, 66.
       104. "muḻavimiḻ tuṇaṅkai turaṅkum viḻaviṉ." -akanāṉūṟu, 336:16
       105. "makaḷir taḻiiya tuṇaṅkai yāṉum.”
               -kuṟuntokai 312;
       106. (1).“niraitoṭi nallavar tuṇaṅkaiyuḷ talaik koḷḷak
       karaiyiṭaik kiḻintaniṉ kāḻakamvanturaiyākkāl” --kalittokai ,
       73:16:17
       (2).“melliṇark kaṇṇi milainta maintar
       elvaḷai makaḷir talaikkai tarūuṟṟū”
               - puṟanāṉūṟu, 24:8;9
       107. “maṭavaral makaḷiroṭu pakalviḷaiyāṭip
       peṟaṟkaruntolcīrt tuṟakka mēykkum.”
               - perumpāṇāṟṟuppaṭai, 387-388
       108. “We may infer that women of the period had a free social life,
       and enjoyed themselves sporting in the river.”
               --J.V. Chellaiah, Pattuppattu, Translation p.46
       109. ‘vaiyeyiṟ ṟavar nāppaṇ vakaiyaṇip polintunī
       taiyiṉī rāṭiya tavantalai paṭuvāyē.”
               - kalittokai .59
       110. “anti viḻaviṟ ṟūriyaṅ kaṟaṅkat
       tiṇkatir matāṇi yoṇkuṟu mākkaḷai
       ōmpiṉart taḻīit tāmpuṇarntu muyaṅkit
       tātaṇi tāmaraip pōtupiṭit tāṅkut
       tāmu mavarum ōrāṅku viḷaṅkak
       kāmar kaviṉiya pēriḷam peṇṭir
       pūviṉar pukaiyiṉar toḻuvaṉar paḻiccic
       ciṟantu puṟaṅkākkuṅ kaṭavuṭ paḷḷiyum.”
               - maturaikkāñci . 460-467
       111. “taiya lavaroṭun tantā ravaroṭum
       kaimmaka vōṭuṅ kātalavaroṭum
       teyvam pēṇit ticai toḻutaṉar ceṉmiṉ
               - paripāṭal, 15: 46-48
       112. aiṅkuṟunūṟu, 257
       113. “yāṇṭupala vāka naraiyilavākutal
       yāṅkā kiyareṉa viṉavuti rāyiṉ
       māṇṭaveṉ maṉaiviyoṭu makkaḷu nirampiṉar
       yāṉkaṇ ṭaṉaiyareṉ ṉiḷaiyarum vēntaṉum
       allavai ceyyāṉ kākkum ataṉṟalai
       āṉṟaṉvin taṭaṅkiya koḷkaic
       cāṉṟōr palaryāṉ vāḻu mūrē
               - puṟanāṉūṟu, 191
       114 “maṉṉuka peruma nīyē toṉṉilaip
       perumalai viṭarakat tarumicaik koṇṭa
       ciṟiyilai nellit tīṅkaṉi kuṟiyā
       tāta ṉiṉṉakat taṭakkic
       cāta ṉīṅka vemakkīt taṉaiyē” -- puṟanāṉūṟu,91:7-11
       115. puṟanāṉūṟu, 95
       116. tirukkuṟaḷ peṇvaḻiccēral – parimēlaḻakar urai
       117. tiruvaḷḷuvar allatu vāḻkkai viḷakkam p.206-210
       118. iṉṉā nāṟpatu, 37, 3-4
       119. “kāḻkoṇṭa illāḷaik
       kōlāṟ puṭaittalum.”
               - tirikaṭukam, 3
       120. “etir niṟkum peṇṇum.”
               - tirikaṭukam 67
       121. “uṭuttāṭai yillātār nīrāṭṭum peṇṭir
       toṭuttāṇ ṭavaippōr pukalum-koṭuttaḷikkum
       āṇmai yuṭaiyavar nalkuravum immūṉṟum
       kāṇa ariyaveṉ kaṇ.
               - tirikaṭukam ,71”
       122. “paḻiyañcāṉ vāḻum pacuvum aḻiviṉāl
       koṇṭa aruntavam viṭṭāṉum- koṇṭirun
       tillañci vāḻum erutum ivar mūvar
       nelluṇṭal nelluṇṭal neñciṟkōr nōy
               - tirikaṭukam, 78
       123. K.K.Pillai, The Social History of the Tamils. Part -1, p.
       390-391
       124. ovattaṉṉa viṉaipuṉai nalliṟ
       pāvaiyaṉṉa nallōḷ kaṇavaṉ
               - patiṟṟuppattu 7.1:-*84
       125. peṇmai cāṉṟu perumaṭa nilaiik
       kaṟpiṟai koṇṭa kamaḻuñ cuṭarnutaṟ
       puraiyōḷ kaṇava.”
               - patiṟṟuppattu, 7:10:14-16
       126. cēṉāṟu nallicaic cēyiḻai kaṇava.'
               - patiṟṟuppattu, 9:8:36
       127. “ceḻumpala viḻunta koḻumpaḵ ṟaṇpaṉaik
       kāvirip paṭappai naṉṉā ṭaṉṉa
       vaḷaṅkeḻu kuṭaiccū laṭaṅkiya koḷkai
       āṟiya kaṟpiṟ ṟēṟiya nallicai
       vaṇṭār kūnta loṇṭoṭi kaṇava.'
               - patiṟṟuppattu, 9;1 O;46-50
       128. 'nallōḷ kaṇava ṉivaṉeṉap
       pallōr kūṟayā nāṇukañ ciṟitē.”
               - kuṟuntokai , 14:5-6
       129. "maṟuvil kaṟpiṉ vāṇutal -
               - tirumurukāṟṟuppaṭai 6
       130. 'nam centilmēya vaḷḷi maṇāḷarkkut tātai kaṇṭāy.”
               - tiruñāṉacampantar tēvāram, tirumuṟaikāṭṭup patikam
       -----------------------
                        _________________________________

       ṭākṭar ci. pālacuppiramaṇiyaṉ nūlkaḷ
       cēranāṭṭuc centamiḻ ilakkiyaṅkaḷ
       tamiḻ ilakkiya varalāṟu
       caṅka ilakkiyam cila pārvaikaḷ
       maṇṇil nalla vaṇṇam vāḻalām
       ilakkiya aṇikaḷ
       maṉōṉmaṇiyam
       uruvum tiruvum
       kaṭṭurai vaḷam
       malar kāṭṭum vāḻkkai
       ilakkiyak kāṭcikaḷ
       cāṉṟōrkaḷ
       tamiḻ pāratiyum pāratitācaṉum
       pāvaip pāṭṭu
       vāḻviyal neṟikaḷ
       vāḻaiyaṭi vāḻai
       kārum tērum
       caṅkakāla makaḷir
       murukaṉ kāṭci
       kaviccakkaravartti oṭṭakkūttar
       Papers in Tamil Literature
       aṟavōr mu.va.
       puraṭcik kaviñar pāvēntar pāratitācaṉ
       tiruvempāvai viḷakkam
       nallōr nallurai
       A Critical Study of Kuruntokai
       ------------------
     __________________________________________________________________

   This file was last updated on 20 November 2016.
   Feel free to send corrections to the webmaster.

References

   1. http://www.projectmadurai.org/
