                                 [pmdr0.gif]
                     ___________________________________

               cīttalai cāttaṉāriṉ ”maṇimēkalai”
                          āṅkila moḻipeyarppu
                              kaucalyā hārṭ

                           The epic "Manimekalai"
                           by Seethalai Chathanar
                         Translated by Kausalya Hart
                           In unicode/utf-8 format
                     ___________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   Acknowledgements:
       Our Sincere thanks go to Dr. Kausalya Hart (Univ. of California,
       Berkeley, USA, retd) for providing a soft
       copy of this work, with permission for its inclusion as part of the
       Project Madurai etext collections.
       We also thank Prof. George Hart III for his assistance in the
       preparation of this work.
       Preparation of HTML and PDF versions: Dr. K. Kalyanasundaram,
       Lausanne, Switzerland.
       © Project Madurai, 1998-2020.
       Project Madurai is an open, voluntary, worldwide initiative devoted
       to preparation
       of electronic texts of tamil literary works and to distribute them
       free on the Internet.
       Details of Project Madurai are available at the website
       [1]https://www.projectmadurai.org/
       You are welcome to freely distribute this file, provided this
       header page is kept intact.
     __________________________________________________________________

               cīttalai cāttaṉāriṉ ”maṇimēkalai”
                āṅkila moḻipeyarppu - kaucalyā hārṭ

   Source:
       The epic "Manimekalai"
       by Seethalai Chathanar
       Translated by Kausalya Hart
       ----------

     Introduction for Manimekalai, the Epic of Kūlavānihan Chathanar.

       Even though the heroine of this story is Manimekalai, the epic
       includes the stories of many others: Sudhamathi, Gomukhi and her
       son in Chakravālakottam, Manimekalai and Deepathilahai, Āputhiran,
       Adirai, Kāyasandihai and Kānchanan, Punniyarājan, Kannagi,
       Māsāthuvan and others. The translation includes all the stories.
       The epic is divided into thirty chapters, which I have divided into
       seven parts as follows:

   PART. 1 Prince Udayakumaran and Manimekalai in the flower garden and
       the streets of Puhār
       1. The drummer announces Indra’s festival in Pukar
       2. The gossip of the town
       3. The flower gardens and streets of Puhār
       4. Prince Udayakumaran sees Manimekalai through the walls of the
       marble mandapam
       5. Sudhamathi and the prince. The goddess Manimekalai appears
       PART 2. The Goddess Manimekalai
       6. The goddess Manimekalai tells the story of the Chakravālakottam
       to Sudhamathi
       7. The goddess wakes up Sudhamathi
       8. Manimekalai wakes up in Manipallavam
       9. Manimekalai sees the Buddha Peedihai and it tells her previous
       births
       10. The story of the sage Chakkaran and Manimekalai (Lakshmi in her
       former birth)
       PART 3. The Amudhasurabhi and Young Āputhiran
       11. Manimekalai receives the Amudhasurabhi from Gomuki pond. The
       story of young Āputhiran
       12. Aravanar and Manimekalai
       13. Aravanar tells the story of young Āputhiran to Manimekalai
       14. The story of the Amudhasurabhi
       15. Manimekalai begs for food and feeds the poor
       16. The story of Sāduvan and Āthirai. Āthirai gives food from the
       Amudhasurabhi
       PART 4 Udayakumaran and Kānchanan. The story of Kāyasandihai
       17. Manimekalai feeds the poor. The story of Kāyasandihai
       18. Chitrāpathi goes to see Udayakumaran. Udayakumaran goes to the
       temple
       19. The king changes the prison to a choultry and Manimekalai feeds
       the poor
       20. Udayakumaran and Kānchanan
       PART 5. The Queen and Manimekalai
       21. The Kandil Pāvai tells Manimekalai’s future
       22. The king imprisons Manimekalai. The story of Dharmadathan and
       Visākai
       23. The queen asks the king to release Manimekalai and takes her to
       her palace
       24. Chitrāpathi asks the queen to release Manimekalai and
       Manimekalai reaches the country of king Punniyarājan
       PART 6 Punniyarājan and Manimekalai
       25. Punniyarājan goes to Manipallavam and knows his previous births
       26. Manimekalai meets the goddess Kannagi. She enters Vanji city
       PART 7 Manimekalai’s Tapas. Manimekalai and the Philosophers
       27. Manimekalai asks various philosophers their philosophies and
       they give their answers
       28. Manimekalai goes to the city of Kanji and sees her grandfather
       Māsāthuvan
       29. Manimekalai learns dharma from Aravanar. The story of
       Killivalavan and Peelivalai
       30. Manimekalai performs tapas not to be born again

   The story of Manimekalai
   At the beginning of the epic, the author Seethalai Chathanar praises
   the goddess Sambāpathi and describes how the Kaviri river came to the
   Chola country and how the city there was called Kaviripumpattinam. The
   rishi Agasthiya tells the king Todithol Chembian to celebrate a
   festival in Pukār for Indra, the king of the gods, and the king decides
   to celebrate the festival.
   A drummer announces the festival and the people decorate their houses
   and Pukār. Many scholars of religion, literature, and orators come to
   Pukār.
   Mādhavi, the mother of Manimekalai, goes to Indra’s festival without
   Manimekalai and Chitrāpathi, the mother of Mādhavi, sees that
   Manimekalai is not at the festival. She calls Vasanthamālai, a friend
   of Madhavi, and asks her to go and bring Mādhavi and Manimekalai.
   Mādhavi refuses to come to the festival.
   When Manimekalai is stringing garlands she hears what Mādhavi tells
   about Kovalan and Kannagi, her father and mother, and is upset and
   sheds tears. Mādhavi tells Manimekalai to go to the flower garden and
   bring some new flowers. Sudhamathi and Manimekalai go to the flower
   garden.
   The Chola prince Udayakumaran sees that his friend Ettikumaran is sad
   and asks him the reason. Ettikumaran tells the prince that he is upset
   to see Manimekalai as a bhikshuni. Udayakumaran tells Ettikumaran that
   he will go and bring Manimekalai in his chariot. When the prince
   approaches the garden where Manimekalai is picking flowers, Manimekalai
   hears the sound of the chariot and tells Sudhamathi that Vasanthamālai
   has told Mādhavi that Udayan is attracted to Manimekalai. Sudhamathi is
   worried and puts Manimekalai in the marble mandapam in the garden and
   locks her there. The prince Udayakumaran arrives and asks where
   Manimekalai is. Sudhamathi tells him that the beauty of the body does
   not last as the body becomes diseased and loses its beauty.
   At that time Udayan sees Manimekalai through the walls of marble
   mandapam. Sudhamathi tells the prince the story of her and her father,
   how her father searched and begged to receive food, how the Jains did
   not want to help them but a Buddhist monk did give them the help they
   needed. Udayan continues to love Manimekalai and decides to go to
   Chitrāpathi and get her help.
   At that time evening comes. The goddess Manimekalai appears and
   worships the Peedihai that is in the marble mandapam. Sudhamathi
   worships the goddess and asks her the reason for the name
   Chakkravālakkottam. The goddess tells all about Chakkravālakkottam to
   Sudhamathi.
   After that the goddess takes Manimekalai to Manipallavam island and
   there Manimekalai sees a Buddha Peedihai and is told her previous
   birth. The goddess tells her that her husband in her last birth was
   Ragulan and he is the prince Udayakumaran in her present birth and that
   is why Manimekalai’s heart begins to love him.
   Manimekalai meets Deepathilahai, the goddess of the island, and she
   tells Manimekalai about Āputhiran and the Amudhasurabhi, the pot that
   never runs out of food. She tells her that Āputhiran put the
   Amudhasurabhi in Gomukhi pond. They both go to the pond and the
   Amudhasurabhi comes into Manimekalai’s hands. Manimekalai also hears
   the story of Āputhiran from the Buddhist sage Aravana Adigal.
   Manimekalai feeds the poor and the hungry with the Amudhasurabhi.
   Udayakumaran sees Manimekalai feeding the poor in the temple and tries
   to talk to her. Manimekalai wishes to avoid him and takes the form of
   the Apsaras Kāyasandihai who was living on the earth because of a
   curse. Kanchanan, Kāyasandihai husband, comes to meet his wife and sees
   Manimekalai feeding the poor after assuming the form of Kāyasandihai.
   Kanchanan thinks that his wife loves Udayakumaran and kills him.
   After this the queen mother of the prince gives many troubles to
   Manimekalai because she blames Manimekalai for the death of her son.
   The queen imprisons her and Aravanar, Mādhavi and Sudhamathi come and
   release her.
   Manimekalai meets Punniyarājan who was Āputhiran in his previous birth
   and they both go to Manipallavam where Punniyarājan finds out about his
   previous birth.
   Manimekalai goes to Vanji city and sees the statue of her mother
   Kannagi and meets many religious scholars. Then she goes to Kanchi and
   hears about the Dharma from Aravanar. She performs tapas and lives as a
   Buddhist bhikshuni.

                      Manimekalai of Settalai Chathanar

   Pathiham
   patikam
   iḷaṅkatir ñāyiṟu eḷḷum tōṟṟattu
   viḷaṅkuoḷi mēṉi viricaṭai yāṭṭi
   poṉtikaḻ neṭuvarai uccit tōṉṟit
   teṉticaip peyarntait tīvat teyvatam
   cākaic campu taṉkīḻ niṉṟu
   mānila maṭantaikku varuntuyar kēṭṭu
   ventiṟal arakkarkku vempakai nōṟṟa
   campu eṉpāḷ campā patiyiṉaḷ
   ceṅkatirc celvaṉ tirukkulam viḷakkum
   kañca vēṭkaiyil kāntamaṉ vēṇṭa         00-10
   amara muṉivaṉ akattiyaṉ taṉātu
   karakam kaviḻtta kāvirip pāvai
   ceṅkuṇakku oḻukiya accampā patiayal
   poṅkunīrp parappoṭu poruntit tōṉṟa,
   āṅku iṉitu irunta aruntava mutiyōḷ
   ōṅkunīrp pāvaiyai uvantuetir koṇṭu āṅku
   āṇu vicumpiṉ ākāya kaṅkai
   vēṇavāt tīrtta viḷakkē vāeṉa,
   piṉṉilai muṉiyāp peruntavaṉ kēṭṭuīṅku
   aṉṉai kēḷiv aruntava mutiyōḷa         00-20
   niṉṉāl vaṇaṅkum takaimaiyaḷ vaṇaṅkueṉapa
   pāṭalcāl ciṟappiṟ paratattu ōṅkiya
   kōṭāc ceṅkōl cōḻartam kulakkoṭi
   kōḷnilai tirintu kōṭai nīṭiṉuma
   tāṉnilai tiriyāt taṇtamiḻp pāvai
   toḻutaṉaḷ niṟpaat tolmū tāṭṭi
   kaḻumiya uvakaiyil kavāṉkoṇ ṭiruntu
   teyvak karuvum ticaimukak karuvum
   cemmalar mutiyōṉ ceyta annāḷ
   eṉpeyarp paṭuttaiv virumpeyar mūtūr         00-30
   niṉpeyarp paṭuttēṉ nīvā ḻiyaeṉa
   irupāl peyariya urukeḻu mūtūr
   orunūṟu vēḷvi uravōṉ taṉakkupa
   peruviḻā aṟaintatum, perukiyatu alareṉaca
   citainta neñciṟ cittirā patitāṉa
   vayanta mālaiyāl mātavikku uraittatum,
   maṇimē kalaitāṉ māmalar koyya
   aṇimalarp pūmpoḻil akavayiṉ ceṉṟatuma
   āṅkuap pūmpoḻil araciḷaṅ kumaraṉaipa
   pāṅkil kaṇṭuavaḷ paḷikkaṟai pukkatuma         00-40
   paḷikkaṟai pukka pāvaiyaik kaṇṭavaṉa
   tuḷakkuṟu neñcil tuyaroṭum pōyapiṉa
   maṇimē kalāteyvam vantutōṉ ṟiyatuma
   maṇimē kalaiyaimaṇi pallavattu uyttatum,
   uvavaṉa maruṅkiṉav vuraicāl teyvatama
   cutamati taṉṉait tuyileṭup piyatūuma
   āṅkuat tīvakattu āyiḻai nallāḷ
   tāṉtuyil uṇarntu taṉittuyar uḻantatuma
   uḻantōḷ āṅkaṇōr oḷimaṇip pīṭikaipa
   paḻampiṟap pellām pāṉmaiyiṉ uṇarntatum,         00-50
   uṇarntōḷ muṉṉar uyarteyvam tōṉṟa
   maṉamkaval oḻikeṉa mantiram koṭuttatuma
   tīpa tilakai cevvaṉam tōṉṟa
   māperum pāttiram maṭakkoṭikku aḷittatum,
   pāttiram peṟṟa paintoṭi tāyarōṭu
   yāppuuṟu mātavattu aṟavaṇart toḻutatum,
   aṟavaṇa aṭikaḷ āput tiraṉtiṟam,
   naṟumalark kōtaikku naṉkaṉam uraittatuma,
   aṅkaip pāttiram āput tiraṉtiṟama
   cintā tēvi koṭutta vaṇṇamuma         00-60
   maṟṟuap pāttiram maṭakkoṭi ēntip
   piccaikku avvūrp perunteru aṭaintatum,
   piccai ēṟṟa peyvaḷai kaṭiñaiyil
   pattiṉip peṇṭir pāttūṇ īttatum,
   kārikai nallāḷ kāyacaṇ ṭikaivayiṟṟu
   āṉait tīkkeṭuttu ampalam aṭaintatum,
   ampalam aṭaintaṉaḷ āyiḻai eṉṟē
   koṅkualar naṟuntārk kōmakaṉ ceṉṟatum,
   ampalam aṭainta araciḷaṅ kumaraṉmuṉa         00-70
   vañca viñcaiyaṉ makaḷvaṭi vāki
   maṟañcey vēlōṉ vāṉciṟaik kōṭṭam,
   aṟamcey kōṭṭam ākkiya vaṇṇamum,
   kāyacaṇ ṭikaieṉa viñcaik kāñcaṉaṉa
   āyiḻai taṉṉai akalātu aṇukalum,
   vañca viñcaiyaṉ maṉṉavaṉ ciṟuvaṉai
   maintuuṭai vāḷil tappiya vaṇṇamum,
   aiari uṇkaṇ avaṉtuyar poṟāaḷ
   teyvak kiḷaviyil teḷinta vaṇṇamum,
   aṟaikaḻal vēntaṉ āyiḻai taṉṉaic         00-80
   ciṟaicey keṉṟatum ciṟaivīṭu ceytatum,
   naṟumalark kōtaikku nallaṟam uraittuāṅku
   āyvaḷai āput tiraṉnāṭu aṭaintatum
   āṅkuavaṉ taṉṉōṭu aṇiyiḻai pōki
   ōṅkiya maṇipal lavattiṭai uṟṟatum,
   uṟṟavaḷ āṅkuōr uyarntavaṉ vaṭivāyp
   poṉkoṭi vañciyil poruntiya vaṇṇamum,
   navaiaṟu naṉporuḷ uraimi ṉōeṉac
   camayak kaṇakkar tamtiṟam kēṭṭatum,
   āṅkuat tāyarōṭu aṟavaṇart tērntu
   90 pūṅkoṭi kacci mānakar pukkatum,         00-90
   pukkavaḷ koṇṭa poyuruk kaḷaintu
   maṟṟavar pātam vaṇaṅkiya vaṇṇamum,
   tavattiṟam pūṇṭu tarumam kēṭṭup
   pavattiṟam aṟukeṉap pāvai nōṟṟatum,
   iḷaṅkō vēntaṉ aruḷik kēṭpa         00-95
   vaḷaṅkeḻu kūla vāṇikaṉ cāttaṉ
   māvaṇ tamiḻttiṟam maṇimē kalaituṟavu
   āṟaim pāṭṭiṉuḷ aṟiyavait taṉaṉeṉ.
   patikam muṟṟiṟṟu.
   -----
   Praise of the goddess Sambapathi
   The goddess Sambāpathi defeats the early morning sunlight
   rising over the tall shining mountain in the Chola country.
   She is red and rises from the mountain and stays there.
   She is the enemy of the Rākshasas on the earth.
   She protects the Chola country.
   The story of Kāviri
   King Kānthan of the Chola country asked the goddess Kāviri,
   to come and make his lineage flourish.
   Agastya’s pot was turned over by a crow
   and its water flowed as the Kāviri river in the Chola country.
   Sambāpathi, the goddess of the Chola country, saw Kāviri,
   welcomed her and said,
   “You are the Ganga of the sky.
   You, light, came here for king Kānthan.”
   Agastya told Kāviri,
   “Mother, listen. You should worship the ancient Sambāpathi.”
   Kāviri, the goddess of wonderful Tamil and of the Chola lineage,
   never fails to flow in the land of Bharatham praised by poets.
   She saw Sambāpathi and worshiped her. .
   Sambāpathi, pleased to see Kāviri, said,
   “I have named this city after you.
   When Brahma created it he named it after me,
   and so this city has two names, Champu and Kāvirippumpattinam.”
   Kūlavānihan Chathanar, the author, recited the story of Manimekalai.
   The story starts as the prince Udayakumaran saw Manimekalai
   through the marble mandapam and loved her.
   The story of Manimekalai and the Goddess Manimekalai
   The goddess Manimekalai appeared to Manimekalai
   and took her to Manipallavam island and left her there.
   She also took Sudhamati to Manipallavam as she was sleeping.
   Later the goddess woke up Sudhamati on the island
   and took her to her home.
   The goddess Manimekalai also took Manimekalai
   to the island and left her alone there.
   Manimekalai suffered alone on Manipallavam.
   A shining Peedihai appeared before Manimekalai on the island
   and told her previous births.
   The goddess Manimekalai gave her three mantras on the island.
   -----
   The story of Amudhasurabhi
   Deepathilahai, the goddess of Manipallavam, saw Manimekalai
   and told her about the Amudhasurabhi.
   Manimekalai and Deepathilahai went to Gomuki pond
   and Manimekalai received from the pond
   the Amudhasurabhi placed there by Āputhiran.
   Then Manimekalai with the Amudhasurabhi came, saw her mothers
   and went with them to see Aravanar Adigal.
   ------
   Story of Āputhiran
   Aravanar Adigal told Manimekalai the life of Āputhiran.
   He said that Sindhādevi had come to Āputhiran
   and given him a pot at the temple.
   Manimekalai feeds the people
   After that, Manimekalai took the pot and went to beg on the streets,
   giving food to all chaste women and to Ādirai.
   She gave food to Kāyasandihai who had been cursed by a sage.
   Kāyasandihai’s hunger sickness was appeased
   when she ate the food given to her by Manimekalai.
   ------
   The story of Prince Udayakumaran and Kānchanan and the sad end of the
   prince
   Prince Udayakumaran heard that Manimekalai
   was in the temple and went there to see her.
   There Manimekalai took the form of Kāyasandihai
   and approached the prince because she did not want him to love her.
   At that time Kānchanan, the husband of Kāyasandihai,
   came from the sky to see his wife.
   When he saw the prince and Manimekalai who had taken the form of
   Kāyasandihai,
   he thought that the prince loved his wife and killed him.
   The goddess told Kānchanan his mistake
   and he went to his sky land feeling sad.
   The queen, mother of the prince and Manimekalai
   The king imprisoned Manimekalai,
   and the queen released her and tried to harm her.
   Manimekalai used the mantra given to her by the goddess Manimekalai
   and escaped the harm that the queen intended.
   When Mādhavi and Sudhamati asked Aravnar Adigal’s help to release
   Manimekalai,
   he asked the queen to release her and she was released.
   ------
   The story of the king Punniyarājan and Manimekalai
   After that king Punniyarājan met Manimekalai
   and she asked him to come to Manipallavam
   where he could know his previous births.
   Punniyarājan went to Manipallavam to see Manimekalai.
   There the Peedihai told him his previous life.
   After that Punniyarājan went to his country and ruled it.
   After Punniyarājan left Manipallavam,
   Manimekalai went to Vanji city
   and listened to the philosophies of sages.
   Manimekalai, the tapasvini
   Then she went with her mothers to Kānji city
   and they worshiped Aravanar Adigal
   and he taught them dharma.
   Then she became a ascetic.
   .
   Kūlavānihan Chathanar told in thirty chapters
   the story of Manimekalai becoming a sage.
   ----------

      Part. 1 Prince Udayakumaran and Manimekalai in the flower garden
           1 viḻā aṟai kātai [ viḻāaṟainta pāṭṭu ]

   ulakam tiriyā ōṅkuuyar viḻuccīrp
   palarpukaḻ mūtūrp paṇpumēm paṭīiya
   ōṅkuyar malayattu aruntavaṉ uraippat
   tūṅkueyil eṟinta toṭittōḷ cempiyaṉ
   viṇṇavar talaivaṉai vaṇaṅkimuṉ niṉṟu
   maṇṇakattu eṉtaṉ vāṉpati taṉṉuḷ
   mēlōr viḻaiya viḻākkōḷ eṭutta
   nālēḻ nāḷiṉum naṉkuiṉitu uṟaikeṉa
   amarar talaivaṉ āṅkuatu nērntatu
   kavarāk kēḷviyōr kaṭavār ākaliṉ,         01-10
   meyttiṟam vaḻakku naṉporuḷ vīṭueṉum,
   ittiṟam tattam iyalpiṉil kāṭṭum,
   camayak kaṇakkarum tamtuṟai pōkiya
   amayak kaṇakkarum akalār ākika
   karantuuru eytiya kaṭavu ḷāḷarum,
   parantuoruṅku īṇṭiya pāṭai mākkaḷuma
   aimperuṅ kuḻuvum, eṇpēr āyamum
   vantuoruṅku kuḻīi vāṉpati taṉṉuḷ
   koṭittērt tāṉaik koṟṟavaṉ tuyaram,
   viṭutta pūtam viḻākkōḷ maṟappiṉ         01-20
   maṭitta cevvāy valeyiṟu ilaṅka
   iṭikkural muḻakkattu iṭumpai ceytiṭum
   toṭuttapā cattut tolpati narakaraip
   puṭaittuuṇum pūtamum poruntā tāyiṭum
   māyiru ñālattu aracutalai īṇṭum
   āyiram kaṇṇōṉ viḻākkāl koḷkeṉa,
   vaccirak kōṭṭattu maṇamkeḻu muracam
   kaccai yāṉaip piṭarttalai ēṟṟi
   ēṟṟuuri pōrtta iṭiyuṟu muḻakkiṉ
   kūṟṟukkaṇ viḷikkum kuruti vēṭkai         01-30
   muracukaṭip piṭūum mutukkuṭip piṟantōṉ
   tiruviḻai mūtūr vāḻkeṉṟu ētti
   vāṉamum māri poḻika maṉṉavaṉ
   kōḷnilai tiriyāk kōlōṉ ākuka
   tīvakac cānti ceytaru nalnāḷ
   āyiram kaṇṇōṉ taṉṉōṭu āṅkuuḷa
   nālvēṟu tēvarum nalattaku ciṟappil
   pālvēṟu tēvarum ippatip paṭarntu
   maṉṉaṉ karikāl vaḷavaṉ nīṅkiyanāḷ
   innakar pōlvatuōr iyalpiṉatu ākip         01-40
   poṉṉakar vaṟitāp pōtuvar eṉpatu
   tolnilai uṇarntōr tuṇiporuḷ ātaliṉ,
   tōraṇa vītiyum tōmaṟu kōṭṭiyum
   pūraṇa kumpamum polampā likaikaḷum
   pāvai viḷakkum palavuṭaṉ parappumiṉ
   kāykkulaik kamukum vāḻaiyum vañciyum
   pūkkoṭi valliyum karumpum naṭumiṉ
   patti vētikaip pacumpoṉ tūṇattu
   muttut tāmam muṟaiyoṭu nāṟṟumiṉa
   viḻavumali mūtūr vītiyum maṉṟamum         01-50
   paḻamaṇal māṟṟumiṉ putumaṇal parappumiṉ
   katalikaik koṭiyum kāḻūṉṟu vilōtamum
   matalai māṭamum vāyilum cērttumiṉ
   nutalviḻi nāṭṭattu iṟaiyōṉ mutalāp
   pativāḻ catukkattut teyvamī ṟāka
   vēṟuvēṟu ciṟappiṉ vēṟuvēṟu ceyviṉai
   āṟuaṟi marapiṉ aṟintōr ceyyumiṉ
   taṇmaṇal pantarum tāḻtaru potiyilum
   puṇṇiya nalurai aṟivīr poruntumiṉ
   oṭṭiya camayattu uṟuporuḷ vātikaḷ         01-60
   paṭṭimaṇ ṭapattup pāṅkuaṟintu ēṟumiṉ
   paṟṟā mākkaḷ tammuṭaṉ āyiṉum
   ceṟṟamum kalāmum ceyyātu akalumiṉ
   veṇmaṇal kuṉṟamum viripūñ cōlaiyum
   taṇmaṇal turuttiyum tāḻpūn tuṟaikaḷum
   tēvarum makkaḷum ottuuṭaṉ tiritarum
   nālēḻ nāḷiṉum naṉkuaṟin tīreṉ
   oḷiṟuvāḷ maṟavarum tērum māvum
   kaḷiṟum cūḻtarak kaṇmuracu iyampip
   paciyum piṇiyum pakaiyum nīṅki         01-70
   vaciyum vaḷaṉum curakkeṉa vāḻtti
   aṇiviḻā aṟaintaṉaṉ akanakar maṅkueṉ.
   1. viḻāvaṟai kātai muṟṟiṟṟu.
   ----------

                        Chapter 1. Indra’s festival

   Ancient Pukār is famous
   because its people never do wrong.
   Agastya the sage of great tapas, praised by the whole world,
   stayed on high Vindhya mountain.
   He wished to make Pukār, the Chola city,
   more famous than before by celebrating a festival for Indra.
   He told the Chola king, Chembiyan Cheralāthan,
   adorned with heroic bracelets,
   the conquerer of his enemies and the destroyer of their forts,
   to celebrate a festival for Indra the king of the gods.
   The Chola king heard the words of Agastya
   and decided to celebrate a festival on the earth
   for Indra, the king of the gods.
   He asked Indra to come to Pukār
   and stay there for twenty-eight days
   so the people could celebrate the festival for him.
   Indra accepted and came. 01-010
   The festival was filled with scholars of many shastras,
   religious scholars preaching
   the good ways of life and moksha,
   philosophers arguing about religions,
   astrologers telling people their future,
   gods coming in disguise to see Indra’s festival,
   speakers of many languages,
   the five and eight members of the king’s cabinet,
   and the ministers of the king.
   All came to Pukār.
   The guardian Bhudam of Pukār
   The people of Pukār said,
   “If our king, with his chariot and large army, 1-020
   forgets to perform the festival for Indra
   as the gods gather together in Pukār,
   the guardian, the Bhudam of Pukār with a thunderous voice,
   strong teeth and a pursed red mouth,
   conquerer of the enemies of the Chola king,
   will destroy the city
   and there will be a famine in the country.
   Therefore the king should erect a pillar for worship,
   and perform the festival for the thousand-eyed Indra, the king of the
   gods,
   as all the kings and gods are gathered in Pukār to celebrate.”
   The drummer announces Indra’s festival
   The drummer, born in an ancient drummer tribe
   in the village of Vachirakkottam,
   announced the festival in Pukār.
   When his clan beat the drums
   it sounded like thunder
   or as if it were summoning blood-thirsty Yama. 01-030
   He took the flower-adorned drum,
   belted it securely on the back of an elephant
   and began to beat it.
   He announced,
   “May our famous Pukār flourish and prosper.
   May the rain pour three times a month.
   May the king’s scepter
   not be subject to the future decreed by the stars
   when they do not foreshadow good for the country.
   May this festival of lights for thousand-eyed Indra
   begin on a good day.
   May Indra, Agni, Varuna, Yama
   and the other gods from the sky
   gather in Pukār making heaven empty.
   May Pukār look as it did on the day
   when the emperor Karikālvalavan went to war.
   May those who know how it was on that day
   say that now it is just as it was then.” 01-040
   The people decorate Pukār
   The drummer proclaimed,
   “O people, put out pots decorated with flowers and leaves,
   golden pālikais, pāvai lamps and other auspicious things.
   Plant kamuku trees with bunches of unripe fruits,
   flowering plants, and banana and sugarcane trees.
   Hang pearl garlands on the beautiful golden pillars.
   Take away the old sand and spread fresh sand on the streets. 01-050
   Decorate the halls of the ancient town
   and fill them with festivals.
   Decorate the porches and entrances
   with banana leaves and strong-stalked vilotam plants.
   The people worship the gods
   O religious priests,
   you know how to worship the gods
   and celebrate the festivals and the ceremonies
   for Shiva with an eye in his forehead
   and for the other gods of Chadukkam.
   The pattimandram and the scholars.
   O teachers of wisdom,
   go to cool groves filled with sand
   and the potiyil mandram.
   O philosophers of all religious sects,
   go to the debates and join the disputations. 01-060
   Do not fight—
   if you are angry with people you do not like, leave that place.
   At this festival time
   when people wander for twenty eight days
   with the gods on the white mounds of sand
   and beautiful flowering ponds with sand-covered banks,
   may hunger, sickness and enmity be destroyed
   and may homes and wealth flourish!”
   As the warriors with shining swords, chariots,
   horses and elephants surrounded him,
   the drummer praised all and beat the drum
   and announced the beautiful festival of Indra in Pukār. 01-072
   ------------
     __________________________________________________________________

         2. ūr alar uraitta kātai [ ūr alar uraitta pāṭṭu ]

   nāval ōṅkiya māperun tīviṉuḷ
   kāval teyvatam tēvarkōṟku eṭutta
   tīvakac cānti ceytaru nalnāḷ
   maṇimē kalaiyoṭu mātavi vārāt
   taṇiyāt tuṉpam talaittalai mēlvarac
   cittirā patitāṉ cellaluṟṟu iraṅkit
   tattuari neṭuṅkaṇ taṉmakaḷ tōḻi
   vayanta mālaiyai varukeṉak kūuyp
   payaṅkeḻu mānakar alareṭuttu uraieṉa,
   vayanta mālaiyum mātavi tuṟavikku         02-10
   ayarntumey vāṭiya aḻiviṉaḷ ātaliṉ
   maṇimē kalaiyoṭu mātavi irunta
   aṇimalar maṇṭapattu akavayiṉ celīi
   āṭiya cāyal āyiḻai maṭantai
   vāṭiya mēṉi kaṇṭuuḷam varuntip
   poṉnēr aṉaiyāy pukuntatu kēḷāy
   uṉṉōṭu ivvūr uṟṟatuoṉṟu uṇṭukol
   vēttiyal potuiyal eṉṟuiru tiṟattuk
   kūttum pāṭṭum tūkkum tuṇivum
   paṇṇiyāḻk karaṇamum pāṭaip pāṭalum         02-20
   taṇṇumaik karuviyum tāḻtīṅ kuḻalum
   kantukak karuttu maṭainūl ceytiyum
   cuntarac cuṇṇamum tūnīr āṭalum
   pāyal paḷḷiyum paruvattu oḻukkamum
   kāyak karaṇamum kaṇṇiyatu uṇartalum
   kaṭṭurai vakaiyum karantuuṟai kaṇakkum
   vaṭṭikaic ceytiyum malarāyntu toṭuttalum
   kōlam kōṭalum kōvaiyiṉ kōppum
   kālak kaṇitamum kalaikaḷiṉ tuṇivum
   nāṭaka makaḷirkku naṉkaṉam vakutta         02-30
   ōviyac cennūl urainūl kiṭakkaiyum
   kaṟṟut tuṟaipōkiya poṉtoṭi naṅkai
   naltavam purintatu nāṇuṭaittu eṉṟē
   alakuil mūtūr āṉṟavar allatu
   palartokupu uraikkum paṇpuil vāymoḻi
   nayampāṭu illai nāṇuṭaittu eṉṟa
   vayanta mālaikku mātavi uraikkum:
   kātalaṉ uṟṟa kaṭuntuyar kēṭṭup
   pōtal ceyyā uyiroṭu niṉṟē
   poṉkoṭi mūtūrp poruḷurai iḻantu         02-40
   naltoṭi naṅkāy nāṇut tuṟantēṉ
   kātalar iṟappiṉ kaṉaieri potti
   ūtuulaik kurukiṉ uyirttuakattu aṭaṅkātu
   iṉuyir īvar; īyār āyiṉ
   nalnīrp poykaiyiṉ naḷieri pukuvar:
   naḷieri pukāar āyiṉ aṉparōṭu
   uṭaṉuṟai vāḻkkaikku nōṟṟuuṭampu aṭuvar
   pattiṉip peṇṭir parappunīr ñālattu.
   attiṟat tāḷum allaḷem āyiḻai
   kaṇavaṟku uṟṟa kaṭuntuyar poṟāaḷ         02-50
   maṇamali kūntal ciṟupuṟam putaippak
   kaṇṇīr āṭiya katiriḷa vaṉamulai
   tiṇṇitil tirukit tīaḻal pottik
   kāvalaṉ pērūr kaṉaieri ūṭṭiya
   māperum pattiṉi makaḷmaṇi mēkalai
   aruntavap paṭuttal allatu yāvatum
   tiruntāc ceykait tīttoḻil paṭāaḷ
   āṅṅaṉam aṉṟiyum āyiḻai kēḷāy
   īṅkuim mātavar uṟaiviṭam pukuntēṉ
   maṟavaṇam nītta mācuaṟu kēḷvi         02-60
   aṟavaṇa vaṭikaḷ aṭimicai vīḻntu
   māperun tuṉpam koṇṭuuḷam mayaṅkik
   kātalaṉ uṟṟa kaṭuntuyar kūṟap
   piṟantōr uṟuvatu perukiya tuṉpam
   piṟavār uṟuvatu perumpēr iṉpam
   paṟṟiṉ varuvatu muṉṉatu piṉṉatu
   aṟṟōr uṟuvatu aṟikeṉṟu aruḷi
   aivakaic cīlattu amaitiyum kāṭṭi
   uyvakai ivaikoḷeṉṟu uravōṉ aruḷiṉaṉ
   maittaṭaṅ kaṇṇār tamakkumeṉ payanta         02-70
   cittirā patikkum ceppu nīeṉa,
   āṅkuavaḷ uraikēṭṭu arumpeṟal māmaṇi
   ōṅkutiraip peruṅkaṭal vīḻttōr pōṉṟu
   maiyal neñcamoṭu vayanta mālaiyum
   kaiyaṟṟup peyarntaṉaḷ kārikai tiṟattueṉ.         02-75
   ūr alar uraitta muṟṟiṟṟu.
   ---------

                      Chapter 2. The gossip of the town

   Chitrāpathi, the dancer Mādhavi and Vasanthamālai
   On the auspicious day
   when the Deepagachandi festival was celebrated
   for Indra, the king of the gods,
   the people worshiped the gods and asked them to come
   and make the world flourish.
   Mādhavi did not come to the festival
   bringing her daughter Manimekalai with her.
   When Chitrāpathi, Mādhavi’s mother
   saw that they did not come, she felt sad.
   She called Vasanthamālai, a beautiful,
   long-eyed friend of Mādhavi, 02-010
   and said, “Go to Mādhavi
   and tell her the gossip of this rich city.”
   Mādhavi and Vasanthamālai.
   Vasanthamālai was unhappy that Mādhavi
   had become a renunciant and was worried about her.
   She went to the beautiful mandapam blooming with flowers
   where Mādhavi stayed and saw her wearing lovely ornaments.
   Mādhavi looked sad and weak.
   Vasanthamālai told her,
   “You, beautiful as the goddess Lakshmi,
   should listen to what I have to say.
   It seems the people of this city do not like something that you did.
   Mādhavi, the dancer
   Mādhavi, you know various kinds of dance such as vettiyal and
   poduviyal,
   you know how to sing
   and perform the seven kinds of dance rhythms with your feet.
   You can do chendukku and the other seven thukkus, clapping your hands.
   You can perform many thālams,
   play many songs on the yāz, 02-020
   you know all the elements of dance and the abhinayams,
   you can play the drum and the sweet flute,
   and you know how to play with balls,
   to cook, to take a bath with fragrant powder,
   to swim in clean water and sleep without trouble.
   You do everything according to the season,
   and perform the sixty-four abhinayas.
   You understand what other people think
   and know how to converse on many things with them.
   You know how to conceal things.
   You can paint beautiful pictures,
   pluck flowers to make garlands
   and can adorn yourself according to what is needed
   with strings of pearls and garlands.
   You know astrology, all the other arts,
   and the books that teach courtesans how to dance.
   You know painting and can read books. 02-030
   O Mādhavi adorned with golden bangles,
   some elders and most people in the town say that you are an artist
   and you know many things about dance,
   yet you have become a tapasvini.
   This is not good—it is shameful for you.”
   Mādhavi listened to Vasanthamālai and replied,
   “O friend with beautiful ornaments,
   when I heard that my beloved Kovalan had died,
   I did not die but still live.
   I lost all my wealth and my modesty. 02-040
   The people in the city do not respect me and speak badly of me.
   When some women lose their lovers,
   they cannot bear their loss and enter the fire.
   Others do not do that but mortify themselves,
   making their body grow thin
   so they may reach their lovers soon.
   But Kannagi adorned with precious ornaments
   was not like one of those chaste women. 02-050
   She could not bear the misfortune that happened to her husband.
   As her tears fell on her breasts
   she pinched off her breast, threw it down
   and burned Madurai where the Pandiyan king
   had falsely accused her beloved Kovalan,
   believing the words of the goldsmith who had stolen the queen’s
   anklets.
   Manimekalai is like a daughter to that wonderful chaste woman Kannagi.
   The only thing that she could do was to become a bhikshuni.
   She did not do any evil deeds
   and could not live the life of a courtesan.
   That is not all. Listen, O ornamented one,
   I entered into the monastery of the faultless Aravanar Adigal,
   worshiped his feet and told him 02-060
   the sufferings of my beloved and how I suffered
   because of what happened to him.
   Aravanar Adigal said,
   ‘People, born in this world suffer because they desire to live in this
   world
   but those not born in this world receive great joy
   because they do not desire to live in this world.’
   He told me of the peace that comes
   when people do not commit the five sins—
   lust, murder, drink, lying and stealing.
   He gave me his grace and said,
   ‘Follow the path of having no desires.
   That will give you peace.’”
   Mādhavi told all this to Vasanthamālai 02-070
   and asked her to go to her mother Chitrāpathi
   and other women with eyes darkened by kohl
   to tell about her life in the monastery.
   Vasanthamālai listened to the words of Mādhavi
   ornamented with precious jewels
   and, feeling as if she were plunging into the ocean with roaring waves,
   not knowing what to do,
   she left that place with a sorrowful heart
   and went to see Chitrāpathi. 02-075
   -------------
                        ____________________________

        3. malarvaṉam pukka kātai [ malarvaṉampukka pāṭṭu ]

   vayanta mālaikku mātavi uraitta
   uyaṅkunōy varuttattu uraimuṉ tōṉṟi
   māmalar nāṟṟam pōlmaṇi mēkalaikku
   ētu nikaḻcci etirntuḷatu ātaliṉ
   tantaiyum tāyum tāmnaṉi uḻanta
   ventuyar iṭumpai ceviyakam vetuppak
   kātal neñcam kalaṅkik kārikai
   mātar ceṅkaṇ varivaṉappu aḻittup
   pulampunīr uruṭṭip potiyaviḻ naṟumalar
   ilaṅkuitaḻ mālaiyai iṭṭunī rāṭṭa,         03-10
   mātavi maṇimē kalaimukam nōkkit
   tāmarai taṇmati cērntatu pōlak
   kāmar ceṅkaiyil kaṇṇīr māṟṟit
   tūnīr mālai tūttakai iḻantatu
   nikarmalar nīyē koṇarvāy eṉṟalum,
   matumalark kuḻaliyoṭu māmalar toṭukkum
   cutamati kēṭṭut tuyaroṭum kūṟum:
   kuravarkku uṟṟa koṭuntuyar kēṭṭut
   taṇiyāt tuṉpam talaittalai eytum
   maṇimēka kalaitaṉ matimukam taṉṉuḷ         03-20
   aṇitikaḻ nīlattu āymalar ōṭṭiya
   kaṭaimaṇi ukunīr kaṇṭaṉaṉ āyiṉ
   paṭaiyiṭṭu naṭuṅkum kāmaṉ pāvaiyai
   āṭavar kaṇṭāl akaṟalum uṇṭō
   pēṭiyar aṉṟō peṟṟiyiṉ niṉṟiṭiṉ
   āṅṅaṉam aṉṟiyum aṇiyiḻai kēḷāy
   īṅkuin nakarattu yāṉvaruṅ kāraṇam:
   pārā vāram palvaḷam paḻuniya
   kārāḷar caṇpaiyil kaucikaṉ eṉpōṉ
   irupiṟap pāḷaṉ orumakaḷ uḷḷēṉ        03-30
   orutaṉi añcēṉ ōrā neñcamōṭu
   ārā mattiṭai alarkoy vēṉtaṉai
   māruta vēkaṉeṉ pāṉōr viñcaiyaṉ
   tiruviḻai mūtūr tēvarkōṟku eṭutta
   peruviḻāk kāṇum peṟṟiyiṉ varuvōṉ
   tāraṉ mālaiyaṉ tamaṉiyap pūṇiṉaṉ
   pārōr kāṇāp palartoḻu paṭimaiyaṉ
   eṭuttaṉaṉ eṉkoṇaṭu eḻuntaṉaṉ vicumpil
   paṭuttaṉaṉ āṅkuavaṉ pāṉmaiyēṉ āyiṉēṉ
   āṅkuavaṉ īṅkueṉai akaṉṟukaṇ māṟi         03-40
   nīṅkiṉaṉ taṉpati neṭṭiṭai āyiṉum,
   maṇippūṅ kompar maṇimē kalaitāṉa
   taṉittualar koyyum takaimaiyaḷ allaḷ
   paṉmalar aṭukkiya naṉmarap pantara
   ilavan tikaiyiṉ eyilpuṟam pōkiṉ
   ulaka maṉṉavaṉ uḻaiyōr āṅkuuḷar.
   viṇṇavar kōmāṉ viḻākkoḷ nalnāḷ
   maṇṇavar viḻaiyār vāṉavar allatu
   pāṭuvaṇṭu imirā palmaram yāvaiyum
   vāṭā māmalar mālaikaḷ tūkkaliṉ         03-50
   kaipey pācattup pūtam kākkumeṉṟu
   uyyā ṉattiṭai uṇarntōr cellār.
   veṅkatir vemmaiyiṉ viriciṟai iḻanta
   campāti irunta campāti vaṉamum.
   tavānīrk kāvirip pāvaitaṉ tātai
   kavēraṉ āṅku irunta kavēra vaṉamum
   mūppuṭai mutumaiya tākkuaṇaṅku uṭaiya
   mūppuṭai mutumaiya tākkuaṇaṅku uṭaiya
   aruḷum aṉpum āruyir ōmpum
   oruperum pūṭkaiyum oḻiyā nōṉpiṉ         03-60
   pakavaṉatu āṇaiyiṉ palmaram pūkkum
   uvavaṉam eṉpatuoṉṟu uṇṭu
   viḷippuaṟai pōkātu meypuṟattu iṭūum
   paḷikkaṟai maṇṭapam uṇṭuataṉ uḷḷatu
   tūniṟa māmaṇic cuṭaroḷi virinta
   tāmaraip pīṭikai tāṉuṇṭu āṅkuiṭiṉ
   arumpuaviḻ ceyyum alarntaṉa vāṭā
   curumpuiṉam mūcā tolyāṇṭu kaḻiyiṉum
   maṟantēṉ ataṉtiṟam mātavi kēḷāy
   kaṭampūṇṭuōr teyvam karuttiṭai vaittōr         03-70
   āṅkuavar aṭikkuiṭiṉ avaraṭi tāṉuṟum
   nīṅkātu yāṅkaṇum niṉaippila rāyiṭiṉ
   īṅkuitaṉ kāraṇam eṉṉai eṉṟiyēl
   cintai iṉṟiyum ceyviṉai uṟumeṉum
   ventiṟal nōṉpikaḷ viḻumam koḷḷavum
   ceyviṉai cintai iṉṟueṉiṉ yāvatum
   eytātu eṉpōrkku ētu vākavum
   payamkeḻu māmalar iṭṭuk kāṭṭa
   mayaṉpaṇaṭu iḻaitta marapiṉatu atutāṉ
   avvaṉam allatu aṇiyiḻai niṉmakaḷ         03-80
   cevvaṉam cellum cemmai tāṉilaḷ
   maṇimē kalaiyoṭu māmalar koyya
   aṇiyiḻai nallāy yāṉum pōvaleṉṟu
   aṇippūṅ kompar avaḷoṭum kūṭi
   maṇittēr vītiyil cutamati celvuḻīi,
   cimilik karaṇṭaiyaṉ nuḻaikōl pirampiṉaṉ
   tavalaruñ ciṟappiṉ arāntā ṇattuuḷōṉ
   nāṇamum uṭaiyum naṉkaṉam nīttuk
   kāṇā uyirkkum kaiyaṟṟu ēṅki
   uṇṇā nōṉpōṭu uyaval yāṉaiyiṉ         03-90
   maṇṇā mēṉiyaṉ varuvōṉ taṉṉai
   vantīr aṭikaḷnum malaraṭi toḻutēṉ
   entam aṭikaḷ emurai kēṇmō
   aḻukkuuṭai yākkaiyil pukunta numuyir
   puḻukkaṟaip paṭṭōr pōṉṟuuḷam varuntātu
   immaiyum maṟumaiyum iṟutiil iṉpamum
   taṉvayiṉ tarūumeṉ talaimakaṉ uraittatu
   kolaiyum uṇṭō koḻumaṭal teṅkiṉ
   viḷaipūn tēṟaliṉ meyttavat tīrē
   uṇṭu teḷintuiv yōkattu uṟupayaṉ         03-100
   kaṇṭāl emmaiyum kaiyutirk koṇmeṉa
   uṇṇā nōṉpi taṉṉoṭum cūḷuṟṟu
   uṇmeṉa irakkumōr kaḷimakaṉ piṉṉarum
   kaṇaviri mālai kaṭṭiya tiraṇaiyaṉ
   kuvimukiḻ erukkil kōtta mālaiyaṉ
   citaval tuṇiyoṭu cēṇōṅku neṭuñciṉait
   tatarvīḻpu oṭittuk kaṭṭiya uṭaiyiṉaṉ
   veṇpali cāntam meymmuḻutu uṟīip
   paṇpuil kiḷavi palaroṭum uraittāṅku
   aḻūum viḻūum araṟṟum kūum         03-110
   toḻūum eḻūum cuḻalalum cuḻalum
   ōṭalum ōṭum oruciṟai otuṅki
   nīṭalum nīṭum niḻaloṭu maṟalum
   maiyal uṟṟa makaṉpiṉ varuntik
   kaiyaṟu tuṉpam kaṇṭuniṟ kunarum,
   curiyal tāṭi maruḷpaṭu pūṅkuḻal
   pavaḷac cevvāyt tavaḷa vāḷnakai
   oḷari neṭuṅkaṇ veḷḷiveṇ tōṭṭuk
   karuṅkoṭip puruvattu maruṅkuvaḷai piṟainutal
   kāntaḷam ceṅkai ēntuiḷa vaṉamulai         03-120
   akaṉṟa alkul annuṇ maruṅkul
   ikanta vaṭṭuṭai eḻutuvarik kōlattu
   vāṇaṉ pērūr maṟukiṭait tōṉṟi
   nīṇilam aḷantōṉ makaṉmuṉ āṭiya
   pēṭik kōlattup pēṭukāṇ kunarum
   vampa mākkaḷ kampalai mūtūrc
   cuṭumaṇ ōṅkiya neṭunilai maṉaitoṟum
   maiaṟu paṭivattu vāṉavar mutalā
   evvakai uyirkaḷum uvamam kāṭṭi
   veṇcutai viḷakkattu vittakar iyaṟṟiya         03-130
   kaṇkavar ōviyam kaṇṭuniṟ kunarum,
   viḻavu āṟṟup paṭutta kaḻiperu vītiyil
   poṉnāṇ kōtta naṉmaṇik kōvai
   aiyavi appiya neyaṇi mucci
   mayirppuṟam cuṟṟiya kayiṟkaṭai mukkāḻ
   polampiṟaic ceṉṉi nalampeṟat tāḻac
   cevvāyk kutalai meypeṟā maḻalai
   cintupu ciṉṉīr aimpaṭai naṉaippa
   aṟṟam kāvāc cuṟṟuṭaip pūntukil
   toṭuttamaṇik kōvai uṭuppoṭu tuyalvarat         03-140
   taḷarnaṭai tāṅkāk kiḷarpūṇ putalvaraip
   polantēr mīmicaip pukarmuka vēḻattu
   ilaṅkutoṭi nallār cilarniṉṟu ēṟṟa
   ālamar celvaṉ makaṉviḻāk kālkōḷ
   kāṇmi ṉōeṉak kaṇṭuniṟ kunarum
   virāṭaṉ pērūr vicayaṉām pēṭiyaika
   kāṇiya cūḻnta kampalai mākkaḷiṉ
   maṇimē kalaitaṉai vantupuṟam cuṟṟi,
   aṇiyamai tōṟṟattu aruntavap paṭuttiya
   tāyō koṭiyaḷ takavuilaḷ īṅkuivaḷ         03-150
   māmalar koyya malarvaṉam tāṉpukiṉ
   naliḷa aṉṉam nāṇātu āṅkuuḷa
   valluna kollō maṭantai taṉ naṭai
   māmayil āṅkuuḷa vantumuṉ niṟpaṉa
   cāyalkaṟ paṉakolō taiyal taṉṉuṭaṉ
   paiṅkiḷi tāmuḷa pāvaitaṉ kiḷavikku
   eñcala kollō icaiyuna alla
   eṉṟuivai colli yāvarum iṉaintuuka,
   centaḷirc cēvaṭi nilamvaṭu uṟāmal
   kuravamum maravamum kuruntum koṉṟaiyum         03-160
   tilakamum vakuḷamum ceṅkāl veṭciyum
   narantamum nākamum parantualar puṉṉaiyum
   piṭavamum taḷavamum muṭamuḷ tāḻaiyum
   kuṭacamum vetiramum koḻuṅkāl acōkamum
   ceruntiyum vēṅkaiyum peruñcaṇ pakamum
   erimalar ilavamum virimalar parappi
   vittakar iyaṟṟiya viḷaṅkiya kaiviṉaic
   cittirac ceykaip paṭāmpōrt tatuvē
   oppat tōṉṟiya uvavaṉam taṉṉait
   toḻutaṉaḷ kāṭṭiya cutamati taṉṉoṭu         03-170
   malar koyyap pukuntaṉaḷ maṇimē kalaieṉ.
   malarvaṉam pukka kātai muṟṟiṟṟu..
   --------------

       Chapter 3. Sudhamathi and Manimekalai on the streets of Pukār.

   Vasanthamālai went to Chitrāpathi
   and told her what she had heard from Mādhavi.
   It was Manimekalai’s fate that her future
   would be like that of a beautiful flower that spreads fragrance.
   When Manimekalai heard what Mādhavi said,
   she thought of her parents.
   She suffered, her eyes shed tears,
   spoiling her loveliness,
   and the fresh-petaled garland on her breasts
   became wet with her tears. 03-010
   Mādhavi saw her daughter
   and wiped her tears away with her lovely hands,
   looking as if the cool moon had joined a lotus blossom.
   She told her daughter,
   “Your garland has lost its beauty because of your pure tears.
   Go to the garden and bring fresh flowers just like these.”
   At that time, Sudhamathi, Mādhavi’s friend,
   was stringing garlands with Manimekalai.
   When she heard Mādhavi asking Manimekalai to go to the garden,
   she was concerned and said,
   “When Manimekalai heard the terrible things
   that happened to her parents, she was plunged into deep sadness.
   Her eyes lovely as beautiful neelam blossoms
   on her moonlike face shed tears 03-020
   as she thought of her parents’ suffering.
   If Kāma had seen her loveliness,
   he would have thrown down his weapons and shivered.
   Is it possible for any man to see Manimekalai,
   beautiful as a lovely statue, and leave her?
   If any man sees her and doesn’t stay to be near her,
   he must be no man at all.
   The Story of Sudhamathi and Māruthavegan
   O jeweled one, listen to my story,
   I am the only daughter of my father Kausigan, a Brahmin.
   He lived in Sanbai city where Vellalas reside. 03-030
   I was never afraid of anything.
   I would go alone fearlessly to pick flowers for the ashram.
   A Vinjayan adorned with many garlands,
   and golden ornaments called Māruthavegan
   came to beautiful ancient Pukār
   to see the marvelous festival for Indra, the king of the gods.
   If anyone on earth saw him, they would worship his divine form.
   He saw me and took me to his place in the sky.
   I fell in love with him and became his.
   We were happy, but suddenly, as if in the blink of an eye,
   he left me alone and went to his place that was far away.” 03-040
   Description of various gardens
   Then Sudhamathi, afraid that Manimekalai
   was going alone to the garden, told Mādhavi,
   “It is not suitable for Manimekalai, lovely as a vine,
   to go alone to the garden to pluck flowers.
   If she goes near the walls of the fort
   surrounded with trees in the Ilavandihai garden,
   the guards of the palace of the Chola king,
   the ruler of the world, will be there.
   Uyyāvanam is another garden
   where flowers bloom and never wither.
   The people of the earth do not go there—
   only the gods of the sky may go.
   Even during the festival for Indra,
   people do not go there because they know that Bhudams 03-050
   guard Uyyāvanam with ropes in their hands.
   There also can be found Sambāthi garden
   where Sambāthi, the god, lost his wings because of the heat,
   and the Kavera garden of Kaveran,
   the father of the Kāviri, the river that never fails.
   Since the Sambāthi and the Kavera gardens
   are protected by an old spirit that attacks goddesses,
   goddesses do not go there.
   There also can be found Ubavanam
   with trees that never stop blooming, 03-060
   a garden that belongs to Bhagavan Buddha,
   the sage always engaged in penance.
   His principle is to take care of all,
   giving them his grace and love.
   Inside the marble mandapam there,
   the sound of outside voices cannot be heard.
   If someone is inside the marble mandapam
   people outside can only see their shape.
   The Buddha Peedihai.
   There is a Peedihai in the form of a lotus
   shining in various colors like diamonds
   and spreading its light.
   If someone places flowers on them, the buds will open
   into flowers that never become dry.
   Bees do not swarm there.
   Even though many years have passed
   I have not forgotten its power.
   Mādhavi, listen.
   If someone trusts in a god
   and puts flowers on the Peedihai and worships it,
   the flowers will not just bloom and wither like other flowers,
   but rather will go and reach the feet of the god worshiped by all,
   and if someone does not think of any god,
   the flowers that he places will simply remain there.
   The Peedihai was constructed in ancient times by Mayan
   to teach with its flowers.
   It was intended to make those ascetics of hard penance suffer
   who believe that acts bear fruit even when done without intention
   and to support those who say
   that acts done without intention do not bear fruit.
   Your daughter should not go to any flower garden except Ubavanam 03-080
   because she could be harmed in all the other gardens.
   O Mādhavi adorned with ornaments,
   Manimekalai is lovely as a vine—
   I will go with her to pick flowers.”
   On the way to the garden what Sudhamathi and Manimekalai saw.
   A Jain Monk
   They went on the road where shining chariots were running
   and saw a Jain monk from a Jain ashram,
   a sage from the temple of Arugan
   carrying a pot on a rope hanging from a long stick.
   Even though the monk was not wearing any clothes
   he did not feel ashamed.
   He did not want to hurt any creatures
   that might be on his body.
   He had not eaten anything and had not bathed,
   looking like an unbathed, suffering elephant. 03-090
   A Drunkard
   After that, they saw a drunkard.
   He stopped the monk on the streets and spoke to him.
   “O monk, I worship your lotus feet. Hear my words.
   You should not walk, suffering with a dirty body.
   Our guru has taught us that present and future births,
   the end of life and the joy of moksha
   will all come according to one’s karma.
   The soul in our body will not suffer
   as if it were locked in a hot room.
   Is anything wrong with drinking the sweet toddy that comes from palm
   trees?
   If one drinks toddy is it killing anything?
   You do true tapas!
   If you eat and drink like me
   and find that the joy of that is better
   than the results of yoga that you do, why don’t you start drinking?
   If you find this is not true, then do not accept me as your disciple,
   but if you find that it is true, you should accept me.”
   He made this bet with him as some onlookers stood
   and looked at the drunkard and the monk. 03-100
   A crazy man on the street
   A crazy man was wearing arali garlands
   made of buds and erukkam flowers on his arms.
   His clothes were made of leaves and stalks from branches of trees.
   His whole body was smeared with pure sandalwood paste and white ashes.
   He talked to the people around him rudely.
   He cried, fell, babbled, and screamed. 03-110
   He bowed to them, got up,
   wandered all about, and ran here and there.
   He ran a long time, ending in a corner
   where he saw his shadow and became confused.
   People saw him, felt pity and stood around him.
   A pedi (transvestite) in the form of Mohini
   Then they saw some people looking at a pedi 03-115
   dressed as beautiful Mohini,
   the form assumed by Thirumal to cheat the Asuras
   when the milky ocean was churned.
   His hair was dark, curly and decorated with flowers,
   his mouth was red as coral,
   his teeth were white and shiny,
   and his bright long eyes were lined with red.
   He had dark bending eyebrows
   and his forehead was like the crescent moon.
   His lovely red hands were like kāndal blossoms,
   his young beautiful breasts were round, 03-120
   and his waist was broad and thin.
   His arms were painted and his dress
   hung down only to his knees.
   Taking the form of Mohini,
   he danced like Vishnu when the god dressed as a pedi
   on the streets of Cho city of the Rakshasa Vānan.
   The pedi came and danced like the disguised Vishnu,
   and many people stood around him to see him dance.
   Many noisy newcomers came to Pukār
   with its tall palaces and high brick walls
   covered with lovely paintings of faultless gods
   and many creatures painted by skilled artists.
   They attracted people’s eyes and they stood
   and stared at them. 03-130
   Mothers and babies
   Some mothers wearing shining ornaments
   took their children on elephants and chariots for rides.
   The children wore golden chains with pendants studded with diamonds
   and three chains that hung over their foreheads.
   Their mouths were red and they babbled,
   and the moisture from their mouths dripped on their aimpadaithali
   chains.
   Their dresses were caught in the diamonds on their chains
   as they swayed. 03-140
   Their beautiful mothers, adorned with bangles and other ornaments,
   put their children on elephants for rides and felt happy.
   When they saw the children, people said,
   “See the children, they are like Murugan,
   the son of Lord Shiva seated beneath a banyan tree.”
   Seeing Manimekalai people feel sad.
   The people gathered in the garden
   to see the dance of the pedi, disguised as Arjuna
   when he stayed in the city of Virādan.
   They came near Manimekalai and said,
   “Manimekalai is young and beautiful.
   Her mother made her a bhikshuni to do tapas, something cruel.
   She has no compassion for her daughter. 03-150
   If Manimekalai enters the garden to pick beautiful flowers,
   could even the swans that see her walking
   stay there without being ashamed that they cannot walk like her?
   Will the peacocks that stand before her be able to learn her grace?
   Will the green parrots be able to compete with her prattling words
   and the sweetness of her voice that is sweeter than theirs?”
   They said these things and crowded together to see her.
   The beauty of the flower garden
   The garden was blooming
   with kuravam and marvam blossoms
   kurundu and kondrai flowers, 03-160
   thilagam, vahulam and vetchi plants with red stalks,
   blossoming punnai trees surrounded with narandam and nākam plants,
   pidavam, talavam, thorny screwpine trees,
   kudasam, vediram, asoka treea with thick trunks,
   cherunthi blossoms, vengai trees, beautiful shenbaga trees,
   and ilavam plants blooming with fire-like colors.
   All these flowering plants looked like a cloth with a lovely painting
   on it.
   Manimekalai bowed to the Ubavanam
   and went inside the garden with Sudhamathi. 03-171
   ----------
                     ___________________________________

                       4. paḷikkaṟai pukka kātai
[ maṇimēkalai utayakumaraṉaikkaṇṭu paḷikkaṟai pukka pāṭṭu ]

   paritiyañ celvaṉ virikatirt tāṉaikku
   iruḷvaḷaip puṇṭa maruḷpaṭu pūmpoḻila
   kuḻalicait tumpi koḷuttik kāṭṭa
   maḻalai vaṇṭiṉam nalliyāḻ ceyya
   veyilnuḻaipu aṟiyāk kuyilnuḻai potumpar
   mayilāṭu araṅkil mantikāṇ paṉakāṇ;
   mācuaṟat teḷinta maṇinīr ilañcip
   pācaṭaip parappil paṉmalar iṭainiṉṟu
   orutaṉi ōṅkiya viraimalart tāmarai
   araca aṉṉam āṅkuiṉitu iruppak         04-10
   karainiṉṟu ālum orumayil taṉakkuka
   kampuḷ cēval kaṉaikural muḻavāk
   kompar iruṅkuyil viḷippatu kāṇāya
   iyaṅkutēr vīti eḻu tukaḷ cērntu
   vayaṅkuoḷi maḻuṅkiya mātarniṉ mukampōla
   viraimalart tāmarai karainiṉṟu ōṅkiya
   kōṭuuṭait tāḻaik koḻumaṭal aviḻnta
   vālveṇ cuṇṇam āṭiyatu itukāṇ;
   mātar niṉkaṇ pōtueṉac cērntu
   tātuuṇ vaṇṭuiṉam mītukaṭi ceṅkaiyiṉ         04-20
   amciṟai viriya alarnta tāmaraic
   ceṅkayal pāyntu piṟaḻvaṉa kaṇṭuāṅku
   eṟintuatu peṟāatu iraiiḻantu varunta
   maṟintu nīṅku maṇicciral kāṇeṉap
   poḻilum poykaiyum cutamati kāṭṭa,
   maṇimē kalaiam malarvaṉam kāṇpuḻi,
   matimaruḷ veṇkuṭai maṉṉavaṉ ciṟuvaṉ
   utaya kumaraṉ urukeḻu mītūra
   mīyāṉ naṭuṅka naṭuvuniṉṟu ōṅkiya
   kūmpumutal muṟiya vīṅkupiṇi aviḻntu         04-30
   kayiṟukāl pariya vayiṟupāḻ paṭṭāṅku
   itaicitaintu ārppat tiraiporu munnīr
   iyaṅkuticai aṟiyātu yāṅkaṇum ō(r
   mayaṅkukāl eṭutta vaṅkam pōlak
   kāḻōr kaiyaṟa mēlōr iṉṟip
   pākiṉ piḷavaiyiṟ paṇaimukam tuṭaittuk
   kōviyaṉ vītiyum koṭittēr vītiyum
   pīṭikait teruvum peruṅkalakku uṟuttuāṅku
   irupāl peyariya urukeḻu mūtūra
   orupāl paṭāatu oruvaḻit taṅkātu         04-40
   pākum paṟaiyum paruntiṉ pantaruma
   ātula mākkaḷum alavuṟṟu viḷippa
   nīla mālvarai nilaṉoṭu paṭarnteṉaka
   kāla vēkam kaḷimayakku uṟṟeṉa
   viṭuparik kutiraiyiṉ viraintuceṉṟu eytik
   kaṭuṅkaṇ yāṉaiyiṉ kaṭāttiṟam aṭakki
   aṇittērt tāṉaiyoṭu araciḷaṅ kumaraṉ
   maṇittērk koṭuñci kaiyāl paṟṟik
   kāralar kaṭampaṉ allaṉ eṉpatu
   āraṅ kaṇṇiyil cāṟṟiṉaṉ varuvōṉ,         04-50
   nāṭaka maṭantaiyar nalaṅkeḻu vīti
   āṭakac ceyviṉai māṭattu āṅkaṇ
   cāḷaram poḷitta kālpōku peruvaḻi
   vītimaruṅku iyaṉṟa pūaṇaip paḷḷita
   takarak kuḻalāḷ taṉṉoṭu mayaṅki
   makara yāḻiṉ vāṉkōṭu taḻīi
   vaṭṭikaic ceytiyiṉ varainta pāvaiyiṉa
   eṭṭi kumaraṉ iruntōṉ taṉṉai,
   mātar taṉṉoṭu mayaṅkiṉai iruntōy
   yātunī uṟṟa iṭukkaṇ eṉṟalum,         04-60
   āṅkuatu kēṭṭu vīṅkuiḷa mulaiyoṭu
   pāṅkil ceṉṟu tāṉtoḻutu ētti
   maṭṭuaviḻ alaṅkal maṉṉa kumaraṟku
   eṭṭi kumaraṉ eytiyatu uraippōṉ:
   vakaivaric ceppiṉuḷ vaikiya malarpōl
   takainalam vāṭi malarvaṉam pukūuma
   mātavi payanta maṇimē kalaiyoṭu
   kōvalaṉ uṟṟa koṭuntuyar tōṉṟa
   neñcuiṟai koṇṭa nīrmaiyai nīkki
   vempakai narampiṉ eṉkaic celuttiyatu         04-70
   ituyāṉ uṟṟa iṭumpai eṉṟalum,
   matumalart tārōṉ maṉammakiḻ eyti
   āṅkuavaḷ taṉṉaieṉ aṇittēr ēṟṟa
   īṅkuyāṉ varuvēṉ eṉṟuavaṟku uraittu āṅku
   ōṭumaḻai kiḻiyum matiyam pōla
   māṭa vītiyiṉ maṇittēr kaṭaiik
   kāraṇi pūmpoḻil kaṭaimukam kuṟukaat
   tēroli mātar cevimutal icaittalum,
   cittirā patiyōṭu utaya kumaraṉuṟṟu
   eṉmēl vaitta uḷḷat tāṉeṉa         04-80
   vayanta mālai mātavikku orunāḷ
   kiḷanta māṟṟam kēṭṭēṉ ātaliṉa
   āṅkuavaṉ tēroli pōlum āyiḻai
   īṅkueṉ cevimutal icaittatueṉ ceykeṉa
   amutuuṟu tīñcol āyiḻai uraittalum
   cutamati kēṭṭut tuḷakkuṟu mayilpōla
   paḷikkaṟai maṇṭapam pāvaiyaip pukukeṉṟu
   oḷittu aṟai tāḻkōttu uḷḷakattu irīi
   āṅkuatu taṉakkuōr aiviliṉ kiṭakkai
   nīṅkātu niṉṟa nēriḻai taṉṉaik         04-90
   kaleṉ tāṉaiyoṭu kaṭuntēr niṟuttip
   palmalarp pūmpoḻil pakalmuḷait tatupōl
   pūmarac cōlaiyum puṭaiyum poṅkarum
   tāmaraic ceṅkaṇ parappiṉaṉ varūum
   araciḷaṅ kumaraṉ ārumil oruciṟai
   orutaṉi niṉṟāy uṉtiṟam aṟintēṉ urai
   vaḷariḷa vaṉamulai maṭantai meliyala
   taḷariṭai aṟiyum taṉmaiyaḷ kollō
   viḷaiyā maḻalai viḷaintu meliyala
   muḷaieyiṟu arumpi muttunirait taṉakola        04-100
   ceṅkayal neṭuṅkaṇ cevimaruṅku ōṭi
   veṅkaṇai neṭuvēḷ viyappuuraik kumkol
   mātavar uṟaiviṭam orīimaṇi mēkalai
   tāṉē tamiyaḷiṅku eytiyatu uraieṉap,
   potiaṟaip paṭṭōr pōṉṟuuḷam varunti
   matumalark kūntal cutamati uraikkum:
   iḷamai nāṇi mutumai eyti
   uraimuṭivu kāṭṭiya uravōṉ marukaṟku
   aṟivum cālpum araciyal vaḻakkum
   ceṟivaḷai makaḷir ceppalum uṇṭō?         04-110
   aṉaiyatu āyiṉum yāṉoṉṟu kiḷappala
   viṉaiviḷaṅku taṭakkai viṟalōy kēṭṭi:
   viṉaiyiṉ vantatu viṉaikkuviḷaivu āyatu
   puṉaivaṉa nīṅkil pulālpuṟattu iṭuvatu
   mūppuviḷivu uṭaiyatu tīppiṇi irukkai
   paṟṟiṉ paṟṟiṭam kuṟṟak koḷkalam
   puṟṟaaṭaṅku araviṉ ceṟṟac cēkkai
   avalak kavaṉā kaiyāṟu aḻuṅkal
   tavalā uḷḷam taṉpāl uṭaiyatu
   makkaḷ yākkai ituveṉa uṇarntu         04-120
   mikkōy itaṉaip puṟamaṟip pārāya
   eṉṟu avaḷ uraitta icaipaṭu tīñcola
   ceṉṟu avaṉ uḷḷam cērā muṉṉar,
   paḷiṅkupuṟattu eṟinta pavaḷap pāvaiyiṉ
   iḷaṅkoṭi tōṉṟumāl iḷaṅkō muṉeṉ.         04-125
   paḷikkaṟai pukka kātai muṟṟiṟṟu.
   -----------

               Chapter 4. Prince Udayakumaran sees Manimekalai

   Sudhamathi showed Manimekalai the bees, cuckoo birds,
   monkeys, swans, peacocks, lotuses, and tāzai flowers.
   Sudhamathi said, “See all these, Manimekalai.
   The darkness in the blooming garden
   is worried as it sees the bright rich rays of the sun
   and slowly leaves.
   See the bees that sing like flutes
   and the fireflies that light up and chase the darkness away.
   See how the bees with childlike voices
   swarm and sound like a yāz.
   See how the garden is so dense that sunlight cannot come in.
   See how the cuckoos enter the dense garden
   where monkeys play and peacocks dance.
   O Manimekalai see all this. 04-010
   The dance of the peacock
   See the pond with clear jewel-like water
   overspread with green moss.
   One fragrant blooming lotus
   is standing among many flowers
   and a king swan rests on it sweetly.
   The lovely peacock on the bank of the pond
   dances beautifully for the swan to see.
   The rooster with a rough voice crows,
   sounding as if it were a drum
   while the dark cuckoo on the branches
   sings for the dancing of the peacock.
   O Manimekalai, see this.
   Tāzai flowers
   The tāzai flowers are covered with the dust
   kicked up by the wheels of the chariots speeding along the streets,
   and your face is like the fragrant lotus blooming beneath those tāzai
   flowers
   that shed white pollen on them.
   Manimekalai’ s red fingers and the chichili bird
   Your reddish hands chase away
   the honey-drinking bees swarming around your face thinking it a lotus.
   See how the beautiful blue jewel-like chichili birds
   are distressed when they fly to catch fish
   swimming among the lotuses in the pond
   and cannot catch them.”
   Sudhamathi showed all these things in the garden and the pond
   to Manimekalai and said, “O Manimekalai see all these things!”
   Prince Udayakumaran arrives at the garden on his horse.
   Udayakumaran, the son of the Chola king,
   the ruler of the world under the white parasol
   that defeats the brightness of the moon,
   came to the garden riding his horse .
   The galloping horse of the prince.
   The prince’s horse sped swiftly
   as if it were a boat caught in a storm,
   seeming not to know where it needed to go
   because of the wild waves and wind
   while its captain trembles
   and the mast towering above its sails is broken,
   and the ropes holding its sails have snapped and clatter loosely.
   04-030
   The angry elephant
   At that time a mahout struck his elephant with his goad
   and it became wild, spreading confusion along the royal street,
   the streets where bannered chariots run,
   and the street with the divine peedikai in that city of two parts.
   The mahout, the drummers, a flock of vultures,
   wanderers and poor people on the streets,
   all were scared and screamed for help
   as that royal elephant named Kālamegam was maddened
   and ran like a dark mountain down the street. 04-040
   The prince of the Cholas adorned with an athi garland,
   holding the rail on his beautiful chariot,
   sped and controled the elephant.
   Even though he was as handsome and valorous as the god Murugan,
   one could tell he was the Chola prince
   because of the athi garland of the Cholas that he wore. 04-050
   The prince and his friend Ettikumaran.
   The handsome prince with his garland
   rode down the beautiful streets of the city
   where his friend Ettikumaran was sitting on a porch
   on the street of women dancers and actresses.
   There the porches were made of gold
   and a breeze blew through the windows of the houses.
   Ettikumaran was lying on a flower-spread bed
   embracing a woman with lovely fragrant hair.
   As he played a makara yāz
   he seemed motionless, as if he were a painting.
   The prince saw him and asked,
   “You look unsure, staying here with these women.
   What is troubling you?”
   Ettikumaran, embracing the woman,
   went near the prince adorned with a garland dripping with honey.
   He said, “I saw Mādhavi’s daughter Manimekalai.
   She was suffering as she thought of her father Kovalan
   and looked like a withering flower locked in a box.
   When I saw her I felt sad like her and began to play my yāz.
   This is what is troubling me.”
   The prince goes to bring Manimekalai
   The prince with his honey-dripping garland
   was pleased to hear Ettikumaran and said,
   “I will go, put her on my beautiful chariot and bring her here.”
   He drove his swift chariot and it went like the moon cutting through a
   bank of clouds.
   Driving his chariot on the palace-lined streets
   he reached the entrance of the flower garden
   where the trees were so tall they touched the sky.
   Manimekalai, worried when she heard the sound of his chariot,
   asked Sudhamathi with her sweet nectar-like voice,
   “I overheard Vasanthamālai talking to Mādhavi
   saying Udayakumaran had told Chitrāpathi that he likes me. 04-080
   Now I think I hear the sound of Udayakumaran’s chariot.
   What should I do?”
   Sudhamathi, shocked and trembling like a terrified peacock,
   said to Manimekalai, “Go into the marble mandapam.”
   When Manimekalai went inside, Sudhamathi locked its door,
   went a little distance and stood there.
   The Prince and Sudhamathi.
   The young prince arrived at the garden
   bright with many flowers blooming like the rays of the sun
   and stopped his swift chariot that was always escorted by his army.
   04-090
   The young prince came as if the sun had entered,
   spreading its light in the flowering garden.
   He looked around with his lotus eyes
   at the flowering trees and the bushes and saw Sudhamathi.
   He said, “There is no one here—you are alone.
   If your soft-natured friend Manimekalai walked here,
   wouldn’t her waist suffer?
   Wouldn’t she be speaking like a child?
   Wouldn’t her pearl-like teeth just be growing in? 04-100
   Wouldn’t her long fish-shaped eyes extend to her ears?
   Wouldn’t even Kama be surprised seeing her eyes?
   Why has Manimekalai left the ashram of the monks
   and come here alone?”
   Sudhamathi advises the prince
   Sudhamathi, wearing flowers dripping with honey,
   feeling as if she were locked in a room, told the prince,
   “You come from the famous dynasty of king Karikālan.
   I am very simple—how could I advise you what to do?
   When two old people came to young Karikālan for justice,
   he disguised himself as an old man and gave them justice.
   You were born in that Chola dynasty.
   How can I, a woman adorned with lovely bracelets, advise you? 04-110
   Still I will tell you something.
   O you with strong hands that fight in battles, listen!
   People receive a body because of karma,
   and that body experiences good and bad karma.
   If one takes away its clothes and ornaments,
   it is only flesh that will be discarded.
   A body grows old and gets terrible diseases.
   It desires everything on earth,
   and does many wrong things.
   It is filled with anger
   and is dangerous as a snake pit.
   Filled with troubles and disabilities
   it is unable to make decisions
   and has a mind that is unsteady.
   You, great prince, should understand
   that this is the nature of the human body.
   Know this and leave Manimekalai.
   She is only a human.”
   The Prince sees Manimekalai through the walls of Palikkarai
   Before even the sweet words of Sudamathi entered the prince’s ears,
   through the marble walls of the room
   where Sudhamathi had asked her to hide
   he saw Manimekalai, beautiful as a coral doll or young vine. 04-125
   -------------
                        ____________________________

              5. maṇimēkalāteyvam vantu tōṉṟiya kātai
[ maṇimēkalai utayakumaraṉpāl uḷḷattāḷ eṉa maṇimēkalai taṉakku
            maṇimēkalā teyvam vantutōṉṟiya pāṭṭu ]

   iḷaṅkōṉ kaṇṭa iḷampoṉ pūṅkoṭi
   viḷaṅkuoḷi mēṉi viṇṇavar viyappap
   porumukap paḷiṅkiṉ eḻiṉi vīḻttut
   tiruviṉ ceyyōḷ āṭiya pāvaiyiṉ
   viraimalar aiṅkaṇai mīṉa vilōtaṉattu
   uruvi lāḷaṉoṭu uruvam peyarppa
   ōviyaṉ uḷḷattu uḷḷiyatu viyappōṉ
   kāviyaṅ kaṇṇi ākutal teḷintu
   tāḻoḷi maṇṭapam taṉkaiyil taṭaiic
   cūḻvōṉ cutamati taṉmukam nōkkic         05-10
   cittirak kaiviṉai ticaitoṟum ceṟintaṉa
   ettiṟat tāḷniṉ iḷaṅkoṭi uraieṉak,
   kurukupeyark kuṉṟam koṉṟōṉ aṉṉaniṉ
   murukac cevvi mukantutaṉ kaṇṇāl
   parukāḷ āyiṉip paintoṭi naṅkai
   ūḻtaru tavattaḷ cāpa caratti
   kāmaṉ kaṭanta vāymaiyaḷ eṉṟē
   tūmalark kūntal cutamati uraippa,
   ciṟaiyum uṇṭō ceḻumpuṉal mikkuḻīi
   niṟaiyum uṇṭō kāmam kāḻkkoḷiṉ         05-20
   cevviyaḷ āyiṉeṉ cevviyaḷ ākeṉa
   avviya neñcamoṭu akalvōṉ āyiṭai
   amceñ cāyal arāntā ṇattuḷōr
   viñcaiyaṉ iṭṭa viḷaṅkuiḻai eṉṟē
   kaleṉ pērūrp pallōr uraiyiṉai
   āṅkuavar uṟaiviṭam nīṅki āyiḻai
   īṅkuivaḷ taṉṉōṭu eytiyatu uraieṉa,
   vārkaḻal vēntē vāḻkaniṉ kaṇṇi
   tīneṟip paṭarā neñciṉai ākumati
   īṅkuivaḷ taṉṉōṭu eytiya kāraṇam         05-30
   vīṅkunīr ñālam āḷvōy kēṭṭaruḷ
   yāppuuṭai uḷḷattu emaṉai iḻantōṉ
   pārppaṉa mutumakaṉ paṭima uṇṭiyaṉ
   maḻaivaḷam tarūum aḻalōm pāḷaṉ
   paḻaviṉaip payattāl piḻaimaṇam eytiya
   eṉkeṭuttu iraṅkit taṉtaka vuṭaimaiyiṉ
   kuraṅku ceykaṭal kumariyam peruntuṟaip
   parantucel mākkaḷoṭu tēṭiṉaṉ peyarvōṉ
   kaṭalmaṇṭu peruntuṟaik kāviri āṭiya
   vaṭamoḻi yāḷaroṭu varuvōṉ kaṇṭuīṅku        05-40
   yāṅṅaṉam vantaṉai eṉmakaḷ eṉṟē
   tāṅkāk kaṇṇīr eṉtalai utirttuāṅku
   ōtal antaṇarkku ovvēṉ āyiṉum
   kātalaṉ ātaliṉ kaiviṭa līyāṉ
   irantu ūṇ talaikkoṇṭu innakar maruṅkil
   parantupaṭu maṉaitoṟum tirivōṉ orunāḷ,
   puṉiṟṟuāp pāynta vayiṟṟup puṇṇiṉaṉ
   kaṇaviri mālai kaikkoṇ ṭeṉṉa
   niṇamnīṭu peruṅkuṭar kaiyakattu ēnti
   eṉmakaḷ irunta iṭameṉṟu eṇṇit         05-50
   taṉuṟu tuṉpam tāṅkātu pukuntu
   camaṇīr kāḷnum caraṇeṉ ṟōṉai
   ivaṇnīr allaeṉṟu eṉṉoṭum vekuṇṭu
   maiaṟu paṭivattu mātavar puṟattuemaik
   kaiutirk kōṭaliṉ kaṇniṟai nīrēm
   aṟavōr uḷīrō ārumi lōmeṉap
   puṟavōr vītiyil pulampoṭu cāṟṟa,
   maṅkultōy māṭam maṉaitoṟum pukūum
   aṅkaiyil koṇṭa pāttiram uṭaiyōṉ
   katircuṭum amayattup paṉimati mukattōṉ         05-60
   poṉṉil tikaḻum polampū āṭaiyaṉ
   eṉuṟ ṟaṉirō eṉṟuemai nōkki
   aṉpuṭaṉ aḷaiiya aruḷmoḻi ataṉāl
   añcevi niṟaittu neñcakam kuḷirppittut
   taṉkaip pāttiram eṉkait tantuāṅku
   entaikku uṟṟa iṭumpai nīṅka
   eṭuttaṉaṉ taḻīik kaṭuppat talaiēṟṟi
   mātavar uṟaiviṭam kāṭṭiya maṟaiyōṉ
   cātuyar nīkkiya talaivaṉ tavamuṉi
   caṅka tarumaṉ tāṉemakku aruḷiya         05-70
   emkōṉ iyalkuṇaṉ ētamil kuṇapporuḷ
   ulaka nōṉpiṉ palakati uṇarntu
   taṉakkueṉa vāḻāp piṟarkkuuri yāḷaṉ
   iṉpac cevvi maṉpatai eyta
   aruḷaṟam pūṇṭa oruperum pūṭkaiyiṉ
   aṟakkatir āḻi tiṟappaṭa uruṭṭik
   kāmaṉ kaṭanta vāmaṉ pātam
   takaipā rāṭṭutal allatu yāvatum
   mikainā illēṉ vēntē vāḻkeṉa,
   amcol āyiḻai niṉtiṟam aṟintēṉ         05-80
   vañci nuṇiṭai maṇimē kalaitaṉaic
   cittirā patiyāl cērtalum uṇṭueṉṟu
   appoḻil āṅkuavaṉ ayarntu pōyapiṉ,
   paḷikkuaṟai tiṟantu paṉimati mukattuk
   kaḷikkayal piṟaḻāk kāṭciyaḷ ākik
   kaṟput tāṉilaḷ naltava uṇarvuilaḷ
   varuṇak kāppuilaḷ poruḷvilai yāṭṭieṉṟu
   ikaḻntaṉaṉ āki nayantōṉ eṉṉātu
   putuvōṉ piṉṟaip pōṉatueṉ neñcam
   ituvō aṉṉāy kāmattu iyaṟkai         05-90
   ituvē āyiṉ keṭukataṉ tiṟameṉa
   matumalark kuḻalāḷ maṇimē kalaitāṉ
   cutamati taṉṉoṭu niṉṟa ellaiyuḷ,
   intira kōṭaṇai viḻāaṇi virumpi
   vantu kāṇkuṟūum maṇimē kalāteyvam
   patiyakattu uṟaiyumōr paintoṭi āki
   maṇiaṟaip pīṭikai valamkoṇṭu ōṅkip
   pulavaṉ tīrttaṉ puṇṇiyaṉ purāṇaṉ
   ulaka nōṉpiṉ uyarntōy eṉkō!
   kuṟṟam keṭuttōy ceṟṟam ceṟuttōy         05-100
   muṟṟa uṇarnta mutalvā eṉkō!
   kāmaṉ kaṭantōy ēmam āyōy
   tīneṟik kaṭumpakai kaṭintōy eṉkō!
   āyira ārattu āḻiyaṉ tiruntaṭi
   nāā yiramilēṉ ēttuvatu evaṉeṉṟu
   erimaṇip pūṅkoṭi irunila maruṅkuvantu
   orutaṉi tirivatuottu ōtiyiṉ otuṅki
   nilavarai iṟantuōr muṭaṅkunā nīṭṭum,
   pulavarai iṟanta pukāreṉum pūṅkoṭi
   paṉmalar ciṟanta nalnīr akaḻip         05-110
   puḷoli ciṟanta teḷaric cilampuaṭi
   ñāyil iñci nakaimaṇi mēkalai
   vāyilmaruṅku iyaṉṟa vāṉpaṇait tōḷi
   tarunilai vacciram eṉairu kōṭṭam
   etiretir ōṅkiya katiriḷa vaṉamulai
   ārpuṉai vēntaṟkup pēraḷavu iyaṟṟi
   ūḻi eṇṇi nīṭuniṉṟu ōṅkiya
   oruperuṅ kōyil tirumuka vāṭṭi
   kuṇaticai maruṅkil nāṇmutir matiyamum
   kuṭaticai maruṅkil ceṉṟuvīḻ katirum         05-120
   veḷḷiveṇ tōṭṭoṭu poṉtō ṭāka
   eḷaṟu tirumukam poliyap peytalum
   aṉṉac cēval ayarntuviḷai yāṭiya
   taṉuṟu peṭaiyait tāmarai aṭakkap
   pūmpoti citaiyak kiḻittup peṭaikoṇṭu
   ōṅkuirun teṅkiṉ uyarmaṭal ēṟa
   aṉṟil pēṭai arikkural aḻaiic
   ceṉṟuvīḻ poḻutu cēvaṟku icaippap
   pavaḷac ceṅkāl paṟavaik kāṉattuk
   kuvaḷai mēynta kuṭakkaṇ cētā         05-130
   mulaipoḻi tīmpāl eḻu tukaḷ avippak
   kaṉṟuniṉai kurala maṉṟuvaḻip paṭara
   anti antaṇar centīp pēṇap
   paintoṭi makaḷir palarviḷakku eṭuppa
   yāḻōr marutattu iṉṉaram puḷarak
   kōvalar mullaik kuḻalmēl koḷḷa
   amaraka maruṅkil kaṇavaṉai iḻantu
   tamarakam pukūum orumakaḷ pōlak
   katirāṟṟup paṭutta mutirāt tuṉpamōṭu
   anti eṉṉum pacalaimey yāṭṭi         05-140
   vantuiṟut taṉaḷāl mānakar maruṅkueṉ.
   maṇimēkalāteyvam vantu tōṉṟiya kātai muṟṟiṟṟu.
   -------------------

   Chapter 5. Sudhamathi and the prince. The Goddess Manimekalai appears.

   The young prince Udayakumaran saw Manimekalai’s form,
   as beautiful as a golden blooming creeper behind the marble wall.
   If the gods saw her shining body,
   they would wonder whether they were seeing a woman
   or a golden statue of Lakshmi.
   She had a lovely body given by formless Kama
   with five flower arrows and a fish banner.
   The prince was excited to see her form and understood
   that she was a just a lovely woman with eyes like neelam flowers
   even though she looked like a statue
   of Lakshmi behind the marble wall.
   He went near the shining mandapam
   and touched the wall with his hands.
   He felt like a painter seeing a lovely painting
   and wondering at its beauty.
   He realized that she was Manimekalai
   with eyes as beautiful as kāvi flowers.
   The Prince and Sudhamathi
   He looked at Sudhamathi and said,
   “She is beautiful as a painting
   and her beauty shines in all the directions.
   What kind of girl is this Manimekalai,
   lovely as a young vine? Tell me.” 05-010
   Sudhamathi, her hair adorned with lovely flowers, answered,
   “If my friend Manimekalai does not enjoy
   your handsome body that is like the lord Murugan’s
   who split the Kurugu mountain,
   that is because it is her fate to become a bhikshuni.
   It is her curse not to fall into passion.”
   The Prince said,
   “If flooding waters rise, can they be stopped?
   That is how kama is. 05-020
   If someone falls in love, it cannot be stopped.
   I do not mind whether she is a bhikshuni or not.
   Let her be whatever she wants to be.”
   The Prince felt sad and as he was going to leave the garden
   he turned and asked Sudhamathi,
   “O beautiful one!
   Many people in this town gossip
   and say that you, ornamented with jewels,
   loved an Apsaras man and would go with him to his world
   but that he left you in a Jain ashram and went to his world by himself.
   O ornamented one, why did you and she come here alone
   from the Jain monastery? Tell me.”
   The story of Sudhamathi and her father.
   Sudhamathi told the prince,
   “O king adorned with sounding anklets,
   may your atti garland prosper
   and may your heart not follow bad paths.
   You are the prince and ruler of this land
   surrounded by the rolling oceans. 05-030
   I will tell you why I am here with her. This is my story.
   My father was a Brahmin and he lost my faithful mother.
   He became old and begged to eat and do vrathams.
   He performed sacrifices and prayed for rain to fall
   so that crops would flourish.
   Because of my karma I married a bad husband
   and could not live with him.
   I left the place where I lived.
   My father felt sad and tried to find me.
   He searched for me and, traveling with pilgrims,
   came to the ocean to bathe at Kumari
   where monkeys play on the hills.
   He followed some people,
   speakers of the north Indian language,
   and traveled with them to the place
   where the Kaviri river joins the ocean. 05-040
   There in Kumari he saw me and asked,
   shedding tears on me that would not stop,
   ‘O my daughter, how did you come here?’
   My father was a Brahmin and recited the Vedas.
   I was not fit to be with him,
   but he loved me and did not want to leave me.
   He went to all the houses in the city
   and begged to get food to feed me.
   One day a cow attacked him and he suffered a wound in his stomach,
   bleeding and carrying his intestines in his hands.
   He could not bear the pain and we both went to the Jain ashram.
   He thought that because I had stayed there before they would help us.
   He said to them, 05-050
   ‘O Jain saints, I come to you for refuge,’
   but they did not like us and told him,
   ‘you are not fit to stay here.’
   Those evil ones chased us away,
   making our eyes fill with tears as we left that place.
   We went on the streets where people lived, crying and saying,
   ‘We are orphans. Are there any compassionate people here?’
   At that time, we saw a Buddhist bhikshu
   carrying a begging pot in his hands 05-060
   and going to each house asking for food.
   Even though the sun was shining with its hot rays,
   his face was like the bright moon.
   He wore beautiful clothes that were like shining gold.
   He looked at us and asked compassionately,
   ‘Are you in any trouble?’
   With kind words he talked to us and made us happy.
   He gave me the pot that he had in my hand,
   carried my father on his shoulders
   and took us to the Buddhist monastery. 05-070
   He, a monk and accustomed to doing tapas always,
   told us about the Buddha dharma.
   He had a faultless nature, not living for himself
   and giving his life to serve others.
   He had became a monk to make the people of the world happy.
   He followed the Buddha’s wheel of Dharma
   and was without any of the passions.
   I worshiped the feet of him, a disciple of the Buddha.
   My tongue can only praise him—
   I cannot not say anything more than that, O prince.
   May you prosper.” -05-080
   The Prince said,
   “O you adorned with beautiful ornaments,
   I understand what you have told me
   I will go to Chitrāpathi and ask her
   how to make Manimekalai
   whose waist is lovely as a vine accept me.”
   Then, disappointed, he left the garden.
   Manimekalai comes out of the marble room.
   Manimekalai’s face was like the cool moon and her eyes like fish.
   She came out of the marble room and said to Sudhamathi,
   “The prince may think that I am not a chaste woman
   and have no thoughts of penance.
   I do not belong to any of the four varnas,
   so people of those varnas will not protect me.
   Even though he thinks I am a dasi and may not respect me,
   my heart does not think that he has no affection for me—
   it likes him and wants to follow that stranger.
   O dear one, is this the nature of passion?
   If this is passion, I wish its power were destroyed.” 05 -090
   Manimekalai, adorned with flowers dripping with honey,
   said this as she stood with Sudhamathi in a corner at the festival.
   The goddess Manimekalai comes to Pukār
   The goddess Manimekalai appeared, 05-095
   disguised as a lovely girl of that village,
   to see the beautiful festival for the king of the gods, Indra.
   She went around a Peedihai studded with diamonds,
   worshiped the image of the Buddha’s footsteps on it and said,
   “How can I praise you?
   You are learned, pure, virtuous and the ancient one.
   Should I say that you are the highest one in all the rituals of the
   world?
   You are faultless, never become angry, 05-100
   the highest one who understands everything.
   You are beyond all passion, you are the joy of all,
   and you have destroyed karma, the cruel enemy of everyone.
   You have a wheel with a thousand spokes,
   but I do not have thousand tongues to praise your beautiful feet.
   05-105
   A description of Pukār in the evening.
   Pukār, the beautiful lady,
   lovely as a blossoming vine, was filled with scholars. 05-109
   She was surrounded with fields and hills,
   and moats filled with pure water.
   Everywhere flowering plants bloomed.
   Her feet were the moats around the city, 05-110
   her mekalai ornaments were the walls of the forts,
   and her arms the great entrances decorated with strings of flowers.
   The tower of Vachirappadai Kottam
   and the tower of the Karpaga tree Kottam,
   standing opposite each other, were her breasts.
   Her face was the matchless temple that has abided
   in the world for many eons.
   The moon that disappears in the east in the morning 05-120
   and the sun that sets in the west in the evening
   were like silver and golden earrings brightening her face.
   She belonged to the Chola king adorned with an athi garland.
   A male swan played among the lotus flowers,
   embracing his mate above one of the blossoms.
   An andril bird climbed on the highest branch of the palm tree
   and called her mate to tell him that evening was coming.
   Cows, grazing in the forest blooming with kuvalai flowers,
   spilled sweet milk from their udders on the grass,
   and the milk fell on the earth, 05-130
   their calves thought of their mothers and called them
   making the sound fill the open space.
   Brahmins started sacrificial fires for the evening,
   women adorned with lovely bracelets lit their lamps,
   singers in the marudam lands strung and played their yāz’s,
   cowherds on the mullai lands played their flutes,
   and Evening with her fresh body arrived,
   sad that her bright sun was setting,
   as if a girl were entering her parents’ home
   after losing her husband in war. 05-141
   -----------

                       Part 2. The Goddess Manimekalai
                6. cakkaravāḷakkōṭṭam uraitta kātai
       [ maṇimēkalaitaṉakku maṇimēkalāteyvam cakkaravāḷak
kōṭṭam uraittu avaḷai maṇipallavattuk koṇṭupōṉa pāṭṭu ]

   anti mālai nīṅkiya piṉṉar
   vantu tōṉṟiya malarkatir maṇṭilam
   cāṉṟōr taṅkaṇ eytiya kuṟṟam
   tōṉṟuvaḻi viḷaṅkum tōṟṟam pōla
   mācuaṟu vicumpil maṟuniṟam kiḷara
   ācuaṟa viḷaṅkiya amtīm taṇkatir
   veḷḷiveṇ kuṭattup pālcori vatupōl
   kaḷaviḻ pūmpoḻil iṭaiiṭai coriya,
   uruvu koṇṭa miṉṉē pōlat
   tiruvil iṭṭut tikaḻtaru mēṉiyaḷ         06-10
   āti mutalvaṉ aṟavāḻi āḷvōṉ
   pāta pīṭikai paṇintaṉaḷ ēttip
   patiyakattu uṟaiyumōr paintoṭi ākic
   cutamati nallāḷ taṉmukam nōkki
   īṅku niṉṟīr eṉuṟ ṟīreṉa
   āṅkuavaḷ āṅkuavaṉ kūṟiyatu uraittalum
   araciḷaṅ kumaraṉ āyiḻai taṉmēl
   taṇiyā nōkkam tavirntilaṉ āki
   aṟattōr vaṉameṉṟu akaṉṟaṉaṉ āyiṉum
   puṟattōr vītiyil poruntutal oḻiyāṉ         06-20
   perunteru oḻittuip peruvaṉam cūḻnta
   tiruntueyil kuṭapāl ciṟupuḻai pōki
   mikka mātavar virumpiṉar uṟaiyum
   cakkara vāḷak kōṭṭam pukkāl
   kaṅkul kaḻiyiṉum kaṭunavai eytātu
   aṅkunīr pōmeṉṟu arunteyvam uraippa,
   vañca viñcaiyaṉ māruta vēkaṉum
   amceñ cāyal nīyum allatu
   neṭunakar maruṅkiṉ uḷḷōr ellām
   cuṭukāṭṭuk kōṭṭam eṉṟualatu uraiyār         06-30
   cakkara vāḷak kōṭṭam aḵtueṉa,
   mikkōy kūṟiya uraipporuḷ aṟiyēṉ
   īṅku itaṉ kāraṇam eṉṉai yōeṉa
   āṅkuataṉ kāraṇam aṟiyak kūṟuvaṉ
   mātavi makaḷoṭu valiruḷ variṉum
   nīkēḷ eṉṟē nēriḻai kūṟum;in
   nāmap pērūr taṉṉoṭu tōṉṟiya
   īmap puṟaṅkāṭu īṅkuitaṉ ayalatu
   ūrā naltēr ōviyap paṭuttut
   tēvar pukutarūum ceḻuṅkoṭi vāyilum         06-40
   nellum karumpum nīrum cōlaiyum
   nalvaḻi eḻutiya nalaṅkiḷar vāyilum
   veḷḷi veṇcutai iḻukiya māṭat
   tuḷuru eḻutā veḷḷiṭai vāyilum
   maṭitta cevvāyk kaṭutta nōkkiṉ
   toṭutta pācattup piṭitta cūlattu
   neṭunilai maṇṇīṭu niṉṟa vāyilum
   nālperu vāyilum pālpaṭṭu ōṅkiya
   kāppuuṭai iñcik kaṭivaḻaṅku āriṭai
   ulaiyā uḷḷamōṭu uyirkkaṭaṉ iṟuttōr         06-50
   talaitūṅku neṭumaram tāḻntupuṟam cuṟṟip
   pīṭikai ōṅkiya perumpali muṉṟil
   kāṭuamar celvi kaḻiperuṅ kōṭṭamum
   aruntavarkku āyiṉum aracarkku āyiṉum
   oruṅkuuṭaṉ māynta peṇṭirkku āyiṉum
   nālvēṟu varuṇap pālvēṟu kāṭṭi
   iṟantōr maruṅkil ciṟantōr ceyta
   kuṟiyavum neṭiyavum kuṉṟukaṇ ṭaṉṉa
   cuṭumaṇ ōṅkiya neṭunilaik kōṭṭamum,
   aruntiṟal kaṭavuḷ tiruntupalik kantamum         06-60
   niṟaikkal teṟṟiyum miṟaikkaḷac cantiyum
   taṇṭum maṇṭaiyum piṭittuk kāvalar
   uṇṭukaṇ paṭukkum uṟaiyuḷ kuṭikaiyum,
   tūmak koṭiyum cuṭarttō raṇaṅkaḷum,
   īmap pantarum yāṅkaṇum parantu,
   cuṭuvōr iṭuvōr toṭukuḻip paṭuppōr
   tāḻvayiṉ aṭaippōr tāḻiyil kavippōr
   iravum pakalum iḷivuṭaṉ tariyātu
   varuvōr peyarvōr māṟāc cummaiyum,
   eñciyōr maruṅkiṉ īmam cāṟṟi         06-70
   neñcu naṭukkuṟūum neytal ōcaiyum
   tuṟavōr iṟanta aḻuviḷip pūcalum,
   piṟavōr iṟanta aḻuviḷip pūcalum,
   nīḷmuka nariyiṉ tīviḷik kūvum,
   cāvōrp payirum kūkaiyiṉ kuralum
   pulavuūṇ poruntiya kurāliṉ kuralum
   ūṇtalai tuṟṟiya āṇṭalaik kuralum
   nalnīrp puṇari naḷikaṭal ōtaiyiṉ
   iṉṉā icaiyoli eṉṟumniṉṟu aṟātu
   tāṉṟiyum oṭuvaiyum uḻiñcilum oṅkik         06-80
   kāṉṟaiyum cūraiyum kaḷḷiyum aṭarntu
   kāypacik kaṭumpēy kaṇaṅkoṇṭu īṇṭum
   mālamar peruñciṉai vākai maṉṟamum,
   veḷniṇam taṭiyoṭu mānti makiḻciṟantu
   puḷiṟai kūrum veḷḷil maṉṟamum,
   cuṭalai nōṉpikaḷ oṭiyā uḷḷamoṭu
   maṭaitī yuṟukkum vaṉṉi maṉṟamum,
   virata yākkaiyar uṭaitalai tokuttuāṅku
   iruntoṭarp paṭukkum iratti maṉṟamum
   piṇamtiṉ mākkaḷ niṇampaṭu kuḻiciyil         06-90
   viruntāṭṭu ayarum veḷḷiṭai maṉṟamum
   aḻalpey kuḻiciyum puḻalpey maṇṭaiyum
   veḷḷil pāṭaiyum uḷḷīṭṭu aṟuvaiyum
   parinta mālaiyum uṭainta kumpamum
   nellum poriyum cimpali ariciyum
   yāṅkaṇum paranta ōṅkuirum paṟantalai
   tavattuṟai mākkaḷ mikapperuñ celvar
   īṟṟiḷam peṇṭir āṟṟāp pālakar
   mutiyōr eṉṉāṉ iḷaiyōr eṉṉāṉ
   koṭuntoḻi lāḷaṉ koṉṟaṉaṉ kuvippaiv         06-100
   aḻalvāyc cuṭalai tiṉṉak kaṇṭum
   kaḻiperuñ celvak kaḷḷāṭṭu ayarntu
   mikka nallaṟam virumpātu vāḻum
   makkaḷil ciṟanta maṭavōr uṇṭō?
   āṅkuatu taṉṉaiōr aruṅkaṭi nakareṉac
   cārṅkalaṉ eṉpōṉ taṉivaḻic ceṉṟōṉ
   eṉpum taṭiyum utiramum yākkaieṉṟu
   aṉpuṟu mākkaṭku aṟiyac cāṟṟi
   vaḻuvoṭu kiṭanta puḻuūṉ piṇṭattu
   alattakam ūṭṭiya aṭinari vāykkoṇṭu         06-110
   ulappuil iṉpamōṭu uḷaikkum ōtaiyum,
   kalaippuṟa alkul kaḻukukuṭaintu uṇṭu
   nilaittalai neṭuviḷi eṭukkum ōtaiyum,
   kaṭakam ceṟinta kaiyait tīnāy
   uṭaiyak kavvi oṭuṅkā ōtaiyum,
   cāntam tōynta ēntuiḷa vaṉamulai
   kāyntapaci eruvai kavarntuūṇ ōtaiyum,
   paṇpukoḷ yākkaiyiṉ veṇpali araṅkattu
   maṇkaṇai muḻavam āka āṅkuōr
   karuntalai vāṅkik kaiyakattu ēnti        06-120
   irumpēr uvakaiyiṉ eḻuntuōr pēymakaḷ
   puyalō kuḻalō kayalō kaṇṇō
   kumiḻō mūkkō itaḻō kavirō
   pallō muttō eṉṉātu iraṅkātu
   kaṇtoṭṭu uṇṭu kavaiaṭi peyarttut
   taṇṭāk kaḷippiṉ āṭum kūttuk
   kaṇṭaṉaṉ verīik kaṭunavai eyti,
   viṇṭuōr ticaiyiṉ viḷittaṉaṉ peyarntuīṅku
   emaṉai kāṇāy īmac cuṭalaiyiṉ
   vemmutu pēykkueṉ uyirkoṭut tēṉeṉat         06-130
   tamaṉai taṉmuṉ vīḻntumey vaittalum,
   pārppāṉ taṉṉoṭu kaṇiḻantu iruntait
   tīttoḻi lāṭṭieṉ ciṟuvaṉ taṉṉai
   yārumil tamiyēṉ eṉpatu nōkkātu
   āruyir uṇṭatu aṇaṅkō pēyō
   tuṟaiyum maṉṟamum tolvali maraṉum
   uṟaiyuḷum kōṭṭamum kāppāy kāvāy
   takavuilai kollō campā patieṉa
   makaṉmey yākkaiyai mārpuuṟat taḻīi
   īmap puṟaṅkāṭṭu eyilpuṟa vāyilil         06-140
   kōtamai eṉpāḷ koṭuntuyar cāṟṟa,
   kaṭivaḻaṅku vāyilil kaṭuntuyar eyti
   iṭaiiruḷ yāmattu eṉṉaiīṅku aḻaittaṉai
   eṉuṟ ṟaṉaiyō eṉakkuurai eṉṟē
   poṉṉiṉ polinta niṟattāḷ tōṉṟa,
   ārumi lāṭṭieṉ aṟiyāp pālakaṉ
   īmap puṟaṅkāṭṭu eytiṉōṉ taṉṉai
   aṇaṅkō pēyō āruyir uṇṭatu
   uṟaṅkuvāṉ pōlak kiṭantaṉaṉ kāṇeṉa,
   aṇaṅkum pēyum āruyir uṇṇā         06-150
   piṇaṅkunūl mārpaṉ pētukan tāka
   ūḻviṉai vantuivaṉ uyiruṇṭu kaḻintatu
   māperum tuṉpam oḻivāy eṉṟalum,
   eṉuyir koṇṭuivaṉ uyirtan taruḷileṉ
   kaṇil kaṇavaṉai ivaṉkāttu ōmpiṭum
   ivaṉuyir tantueṉ uyirvāṅku eṉṟalum,
   mutumū tāṭṭi iraṅkiṉaḷ moḻivōḷ
   aiyam uṇṭō āruyir pōṉāl
   ceyviṉai maruṅkil ceṉṟupiṟappu eytutal
   āṅkuatu koṇarntuniṉ āriṭar nīkkutal         06-160
   īṅkueṉakku āvatuoṉṟu aṉṟunī iraṅkal
   kolaiaṟam āmeṉum koṭuntoḻil mākkaḷ
   avalap paṭiṟṟuurai āṅkatu maṭavāy
   ulaka maṉṉavarkku uyirkkuuyir īvōr
   ilarō inta īmap puṟaṅkāṭṭu
   aracarkku amaintaṉa āyiram kōṭṭam
   nirayak koṭumoḻi nīoḻi eṉṟalum,
   tēvar taruvar varameṉṟu orumuṟai
   nālmaṟai antaṇar naṉṉūl uraikkum
   māperun teyvam nīaru ḷāviṭiṉ         06-170
   yāṉō kāvēṉ eṉuyir īṅkueṉa,
   ūḻi mutalvaṉ uyirtariṉ allatu
   āḻit tāḻi akavarait tirivōr
   tāmtariṉ yāṉum tarukuvaṉ maṭavāy
   īṅkueṉ āṟṟalum kāṇpāy eṉṟē
   nālvakai marapiṉ arūpap piramarum
   nāṉāl vakaiyiṉ urūpap piramarum
   iruvakaic cuṭarum irumū vakaiyil
   peruvaṉappu eytiya teyvata kaṇaṅkaḷum
   palvakai acurarum paṭutuyar uṟūum         06-180
   eṇvakai narakarum iruvicumpu iyaṅkum
   palmīṉ īṭṭamum nāḷum kōḷum
   taṉakattu aṭakkiya cakkara vāḷattu
   varamtaraṟku uriyōr tamaimuṉ niṟutti
   arantai keṭumivaḷ aruntuyar itueṉac
   campā patitāṉ uraittaam muṟaiyē
   eṅkuvāḻ tēvarum uraippak kēṭṭē,
   kōtamai yuṟṟa koṭuntuyar nīṅki
   īmac cuṭalaiyiṉ makaṉaiiṭṭu iṟantapiṉ
   campā patitaṉ āṟṟal tōṉṟa         06-190
   eṅkuvāḻ tēvarum kūṭiya iṭamtaṉil
   cūḻkaṭal vaḷaiiya vāḻiyaṅ kuṉṟattu
   naṭuvu niṉṟa mēruk kuṉṟamum
   puṭaiyil niṉṟa eḻuvakaik kuṉṟamum
   nālvakai marapiṉ māperun tīvum
   ōrī rāyiram ciṟṟiṭait tīvum
   piṟavum āṅkuataṉ iṭavakai uriyaṉa
   peṟumuṟai marapiṉ aṟivuvarak kāṭṭi
   āṅkuvāḻ uyirkaḷum avvuyir iṭaṅkaḷum
   pāṅkuṟa maṇṇīṭṭil paṇpuṟa vakuttu         06-200
   mikka mayaṉāl iḻaikkap paṭṭa
   cakkara vāḷak kōṭṭamīṅku itukāṇ
   iṭupiṇak kōṭṭattu eyilpuṟam ātaliṉ
   cuṭukāṭṭuk kōṭṭattu eṉṟalatu uraiyār
   itaṉvaravu itueṉṟu irunteyvam uraikka,
   mataṉ il neñcamoṭu vāṉtuyareytip
   piṟantōr vāḻkkai ciṟantōḷ uraippa,
   iṟantuiruḷ kūrnta iṭaiiruḷ yāmattut
   tūṅkueyil eytiya cutamati oḻiyap
   pūṅkoṭi taṉṉaip poruntit taḻīi         06-210
   antaram āṟā āṟuaintu yōcaṉait
   teṉticai maruṅkil ceṉṟutirai uṭutta
   maṇipal lavattiṭai maṇimē kalāteyvam
   aṇiiḻai taṉṉaivaittu akaṉṟatu tāṉeṉ.
   cakkaravāḷakkōṭṭam uraitta kātai muṟṟiṟṟu.
   ----------------

                      Chapter 6. The Chakravālakkottam

   The moon rose as the evening arrived,
   spreading its bright rays,
   its blemishes showing like the failings of good people.
   Its bright cool light fell
   like milk poured from a silver pot on flowering plants
   as they drip honey from their flowers.
   The goddess Manimekalai appears before Sudhamathi and speaks to her
   Like a lightning flash the goddess appeared as a girl.
   Her form was like a rainbow, the bow of Indra.
   She bowed and worshiped the Peedihai
   with the footprint of Buddha on it,
   the ancient god with the wheel of Dharma.
   In the form of a lovely girl in Pukār
   she came to Sudhamathi, looked at her and asked,
   “Why do you stand here?”
   Sudhamathi told the goddess
   “The prince cannot control the irresistible desire
   that he has for Manimekalai, ornamented with beautiful jewels.
   Even after he leaves the garden of the monks,
   he will continue to follow her on the street.” 06-020
   The goddess told Sudhamathi,
   “You and Manimekalai should go along the wide street
   through the small place next to this large garden that is on the west
   side.
   There you will see Chakravālakkottam where monks live happily.
   You will have no trouble during the night if you stay there.
   Go and stay there.”
   Sudhamathi asked the goddess about Chakravālakkottam.
   Sudhamathi asked the goddess,
   “O lovely one,
   only the wicked apsaras Māruthavegan and some others
   call that place Chakravālakkottam.
   The people of this city with tall walls call it Sudukāttukkottam.
   06-030
   I do not know why this is.
   O great one, tell me why you call that place Chakravālakkottam.”
   The goddess, adorned with beautiful ornaments said,
   “I will tell you the reason clearly.
   You came with the daughter of Mādhavi—
   now don’t go away. Even if it grows dark, hear what I say.
   There is a burning ground next to that place
   that terrifies anyone who goes there.
   That fortress has four entrances
   and it is surrounded with guarded walls.
   Into the first entrance of the kottam
   where flags fly over the doors,
   the gods enter on their lovely chariots
   decorated with paintings. 6-040
   The second entrance is surrounded with watered fields
   where paddy and sugarcane flourish.
   On the third entrance the walls are white
   and pictures have not yet been painted on it.
   The fourth entrance is made of silver
   and has no paintings.
   A Bhudam with a red mouth, terrifying face and angry gaze.
   stands to guard the place carrying a trident and a rope.
   The structure and the description of the kottam
   In this Chakravālakkottam surrounded by four walls,
   the heads of people who have sacrificed themselves
   hang on the trees. 06-050
   There is a Peedihai and in front of it
   is a pavilion where people give sacrifices.
   There is a large temple for Kali, the goddess of the forest.
   There are short and tall brick hill-like temples
   constructed for sages when they died doing severe tapas, for kings,
   and for chaste women who died with their husbands.
   They were made for people of various castes. 06-060
   There are pillars made in the names of heroic gods
   and sacrifices are made to them on raised platforms.
   Many streets cross each other and go in circles in that kottam.
   It has huts where guards carrying sticks and pots eat food and sleep.
   Flags fly amid the smoke
   while pandals have been raised with hanging decorations.
   All these things are spread around the burning ground there.
   Noises in Chakravālakkottam.
   The people on the burning ground make many sounds.
   Some burn corpses,
   some bury them,
   some throw corpses randomly in holes,
   some put them in pots,
   and some come and go night and day grieving. 6-070
   There are many sounds there in Chakravālakkottam—
   the sound of neythal drums
   that make people’s hearts shiver when they are beaten,
   the sound of people worshiping buried sages,
   the sound of crowds crying for the dead,
   the mournful sound of long-faced foxes standing near the fire,
   the sound of owls calling out to the dead,
   the sound of the kurāl that eats dead flesh,
   the sound of the andalai that eats and discards that food,
   and the unceasing sound of the clear waves of the ocean.
   Various mandrams
   There is a mandram surrounded with vāhai trees
   with tall branches over which clouds float.
   The roaring sound of the rolling waves of the ocean spreads there.
   06-080
   Mournful sounds never cease in that place,
   covered with bushes of tāndri, oduvai, uzinjil, kāndai, suurai, and
   kalli.
   Many groups of peys wander there with terrible hunger,
   In Vellil mandram, eagles that eat white fat and flesh
   stay in their nests.
   In Vanni mandram, sages on the burning grounds
   make fires ceaselessly.
   In Irathi mandram, 6-090
   sages, doing penance and fasting
   collect the heads and arrange them.
   In Vellidai mandram
   people cook the fat of the dead in pots
   and have a feast.
   The Parandalai Mandram (in the Paranthalai war, the Chola king
   Karikālan defeated the Chera king Neduncheralāthan)
   In the Parandalai Mandram, one can find many things—
   pots with fire inside,
   skulls with holes in them,
   white biers,
   cloths on the corpses,
   dried out garlands, broken pots,
   paddy, fried rice, rice for sacrifices,
   all thrown there, spread on the burning ground
   of great Parandalai Mandram.
   When there is a war,
   the cruel king Yama, compassionless, takes the lives of people—
   sages, the rich, the poor, innocent young children,
   babies, pregnant women, older people—
   he kills them all and puts them in a pile.
   When people see this ground burning with fire that destroys everything,
   they do not worry and do not think of doing good deeds,
   but drink and live without any concerns.
   Could anyone be more ignorant than those people
   The goddess Manimekalai tells Sudhamathi the story of Sārngalan and his
   mother Gothamai
   A traveler named Sārngalan came to a forest
   and saw a pey at a burning ground.
   He was a Brahmin and, as a sage, would tell people
   that the body is only something made of bones, flesh and blood.
   In that burning ground he saw a female Bhudam on a platform
   and he heard many noises:
   a fox carrying meat in its mouth made a happy noise, 06-110
   an eagle eating the flesh of a corpse’s stomach made a noise,
   a wild dog took the hand of a corpse and ran about making a racket,
   a vulture took the flesh of a corpse’s chest, ate it and made a noise.
   All these sounds were like drums on that burning ground.
   As all these sounds mixed together.
   The female pey that Sārngalan saw,
   carrying in her hand the large head of a corpse, danced. 06-120
   She did not care whether the corpse’s hair was like a cloud,
   whether it had fish eyes, a nose like a kumizh,
   a mouth like a murukkam blossom, and pearl-like teeth.
   The pey did not feel sorry for anything
   as she ate the eyes of the corpse
   and danced moving her split feet around joyfully
   on the burning ground.
   Sārngalan was with his mother Gothamai,
   and he saw the pey and screamed in fright.
   He said to his mother, ‘Look, mother, I am going to give my life
   to this old pey on this burning ground,’
   and fell down and died in front of her. 06-130
   His mother held the body of her son to her breast,
   and called the goddess Sambāpathi.
   Shining like gold, Sambāpathi came to her and asked,
   ‘Why did you summon me in the middle of night?
   Tell me what troubles you.’
   Gothamai, holding her son, 06-140
   stood at the entrance of the forest,
   and told the goddess of her terrible troubles.
   ‘My husband is blind.
   I and my son took care of him and I am alone now
   because an anangu killed my son
   and ate him without any compassion.
   Was it an anangu or pey?
   See, how my son lies there as if asleep.
   You are the goddess Sambāpathi
   and you protect and take care of ponds,
   mandrams, plants, houses and temples.
   Don’t you have any compassion?’ 06-150
   Gothamai told her sad story to the goddess Sambāpathi
   standing at the entrance of the forest holding her son’s body.
   Sambāpathi felt sorry for her and said,
   ‘An anangu could not have killed your son.
   Your son, a Brahmin, wears a sacred thread on his chest
   but is ignorant.
   He came to the forest in the middle of the night,
   but his own fate is the cause for his death.
   It is not the fault of anyone. Do not be sad.’
   Gothamai said to the goddess, ‘Take my life and give my son’s life
   back.
   My husband is blind and needs someone to take care of him.
   If my son is alive he will take care of his father.’
   The goddess felt sorry for Gothamai and said,
   ‘If a soul dies, it will be born again according to its karma.
   You should not feel sorry for him 06-160
   because he will be born again.
   I cannot give his life back because it is his fate to die.
   I cannot take away your sorrow.
   O beautiful one, cruel people say that killing is dharma,
   but that is not right and they lie.
   Many have given their lives for their kings,
   and thousands of forts in this forest belong to the king.
   Events like this always happen.
   Do not think of bad things.’
   Gothamai told the goddess,
   ‘The four Vedas say that gods can give whatever boon one wants.
   You are a great goddess.
   If you do not give your grace to me and save my son,
   I will die right here.’ 06-170
   The goddess said,
   ‘Only the ancient god of Uzhi can restore lives—
   the gods and goddesses wandering in this forest cannot.
   If they could, I would also give life to your son,
   but I do not have that ability.
   I do have some powers. I will see what I can do.’
   The goddess Sambāpathi calls various gods and goddesses
   in Chakravālakkottam to come to Gothamai and speak to her.
   She called the four formless Brahmas, sixteen Brahmas with forms,
   the sun, the moon, the six types of beautiful small gods and goddesses,
   many asuras, eight kinds of people in hell,
   all the stars that move in the wide sky,
   and other stars and constellations,
   telling them all to come before Gothamai and the goddess Sambāpathi.
   06-180
   When all the gods had come,
   the goddess told them Gothamai’s troubles
   and asked them to help her.
   When these gods and all other gods in the world
   had heard Gothamai’s troubles,
   they said that her son not die because of the pey
   but because of his fate.
   Gothamai was released from her suffering
   and died with her son. 06-190
   The goddess Manimekalai tells Sudhamathi the reason for the name
   Chakravālakkottam.
   This Cakravalakkottam, the place where all the gods
   and goddesses gathered together for Gothamai,
   has a mountain surrounded by the oceans.
   Meru mountain is at the center of this kottam,
   surrounded with seven small mountains.
   There are four large islands in the ocean,
   and two thousand small islands, and other places.”
   The goddess showed all these places to Sudhamathi
   along with all the places where all creatures live
   and told her how Mayan the carpenter for the gods
   made Cakravālakkottam.”
   She said, “There is a burning ground outside the walls of the forest.
   That is why people call this Sudukattukkottam.
   Such is the history of this place.”
   After that the goddess Manimekalai
   described to Sudhamathi the sorrowful life of people born in the world
   and left her in the forest after she went to sleep there.
   The goddess picked up Manimekalai
   flew south through the sky for thirty yosanai,
   and left the sleeping Manimekalai adorned with ornaments
   on Manipallavam island surrounded by the ocean and left. 06-214
   ------------
                        ____________________________

                         7. tuyil eḻuppiya kātai
[ maṇimēkalāteyvam uvavaṉampukuntu cutamatiyait tuyil eḻuppiya pāṭṭu ]

   maṇimē kalaitaṉai maṇipal lavattiṭai
   maṇimē kalāteyvam vaittu nīṅki
   maṇimē kalaitaṉai malarppoḻil kaṇṭa
   utaya kumaraṉ uṟutuyar eytik
   kaṅkul kaḻiyileṉ kaiyakat tāḷeṉap
   poṅkumel amaḷiyil poruntātu iruntōṉ
   muṉṉart tōṉṟi maṉṉavaṉ makaṉē
   kōlnilai tirintiṭiṉ kōḷnilai tiriyum
   kōḷnilai tirintiṭiṉ mārivaṟam kūrum
   mārivaṟaṅ kūriṉ maṉuyir illai         07-10
   maṉuyir ellām maṇāḷ vēntaṉ
   taṉuyir eṉṉum takutiiṉṟu ākum
   tavattiṟam pūṇṭōḷ taṉmēl vaitta
   avattiṟam oḻikeṉṟu avaṉvayiṉ uraittapiṉ,
   uvavaṉam pukuntuāṅku uṟutuyil koḷḷum
   cutamati taṉṉait tuyiliṭai nīkki
   intira kōṭaṇai innakark kāṇa
   vantēṉ añcal maṇimē kalaiyāṉ
   āticāl muṉivaṉ aṟavaḻip paṭūum
   ētu mutirntatu iḷaṅkoṭikku ātaliṉ         07-20
   viñcaiyiṉ peyarttuniṉ viḷaṅkuiḻai taṉṉaiōr
   vañcamil maṇipal lavattiṭai vaittēṉ
   paṇṭaip piṟappum paṇpuṟa uṇarntuīṅku
   iṉṟuēḻ nāḷil innakar maruṅkē
   vantu tōṉṟum maṭakkoṭi nallāḷ
   kaḷippumāṇ celvak kāval pērūr
   oḷittuuru eytiṉum uṉtiṟam oḷiyāḷ
   āṅkuavaḷ innakar pukunta annāḷ
   īṅku nikaḻvaṉa ētup palauḷa
   mātavi taṉakkuyāṉ vanta vaṇṇamum         07-30
   ētamil neṟimakaḷ eytiya vaṇṇamum
   uraiyāy nīavaḷ eṉtiṟam uṇarum
   tiraiirum pauvattut teyvamoṉṟu uṇṭueṉak
   kōvalaṉ kūṟiik koṭiyiṭai taṉṉaieṉ
   nāmam ceyta nalnāḷ naḷiruḷ
   kāmaṉ kaiyaṟak kaṭunavai aṟukkum
   māperun tavakkoṭi īṉṟaṉai eṉṟē
   naṉavē pōlak kaṉavakattu uraittēṉ
   īṅkuiv vaṇṇam āṅkuavaṭku uraieṉṟu
   antarattu eḻuntuāṅku arunteyvam pōyapiṉ         07-40
   ventuyar eytic cutamati eḻuntuāṅku
   akalmaṉai araṅkattu āciriyar tammoṭu
   vakaiteri mākkaṭku vaṭṭaṇai kāṭṭi
   āṭal puṇarkku araṅkiyal makaḷiril
   kūṭiya kuyiluvak karuvikaṇ tuyiṉṟu
   paṇṇukkiḷai payirum paṇṇiyāḻt tīntoṭai
   koḷaival āyamōṭu icaikūṭ ṭuṇṭu
   vaḷaicēr ceṅkai melviral utaitta
   vemmaivey tuṟātu taṉmaiyil tiriyavum
   paṇpuil kātalaṉ parattamai nōṉātu         07-50
   uṇkaṇ civantāṅku olkukoṭi pōṉṟu
   teruṭṭavum teruḷātu ūṭaloṭu tuyilvōr
   viraippūm paḷḷi vīḻtuṇai taḻuvavum,
   taḷarnaṭai āyamoṭu taṅkātu ōṭi
   viḷaiyāṭu ciṟutēr īrttumey varunti
   amaḷit tuñcum aimpaṭait tālik
   kutalaic cevvāy kuṟunaṭaip putalvarkkuk
   kāval peṇṭir kaṭippakai eṟintu
   tūpam kāṭṭit tūṅkutuyil vatiyavum,
   iṟaiuṟai puṟavum niṟainīrp puḷḷum         07-60
   kāvuṟai paṟavaiyum nāuḷ aḻunti
   viḻavukkaḷi aṭaṅki muḻavukkaṇ tuyiṉṟu
   paḻaviṟal mūtūr pāyalkoḷ naṭunāḷ,
   kōmakaṉ kōyil kuṟunīrk kaṉṉaliṉ
   yāmam koḷpavar ēttuoli aravamum,
   uṟaiyuḷniṉṟu oṭuṅkiya uṇṇā uyakkattu
   niṟaiaḻi yāṉai neṭuṅkū viḷiyum,
   tērvaḻaṅku teruvum ciṟṟiṭai muṭukkarum
   ūrkāp pāḷar eṟituṭi ōtaiyum,
   muḻaṅkunīr muṉtuṟaik kalampuṇar kammiyar         07-70
   tuḻantuaṭu kaḷḷiṉ tōppiuṇṭu ayarntu
   paḻañcerukku uṟṟa aṉantarp pāṇiyum,
   aravāyk kaṭippakai aiyavik kaṭippakai
   viraviya makaḷir ēntiya tūmattup
   putalvaraip payanta puṉiṟutīr kayakkam
   tīrviṉai makaḷir kuḷaṉāṭu aravamum,
   valitta neñciṉ āṭavar iṉṟiyum
   pulikkaṇattu aṉṉōr pūta catukkattuk
   koṭittēr vēntaṉ koṟṟam koḷkeṉa
   iṭikkural muḻakkattu iṭumpali ōtaiyum,         07-80
   īṟṟiḷam peṇṭir āṟṟāp pālakar
   kaṭuñcūl makaḷir neṭumpuṇ uṟṟōr
   tamtuyar keṭukkum mantira mākkaḷ
   maṉṟap pēymakaḷ vantukaik koḷkeṉa
   niṉṟueṟi paliyiṉ neṭuṅkural ōtaiyum,
   palvēṟu ōtaiyum parantuoruṅku icaippak,
   kēṭṭuuḷam kalaṅki ūṭṭiruḷ aḻuvattu
   muruntuēr iḷanakai nīṅkip pūmpoḻil
   tiruntueyil kuṭapāl ciṟupuḻai pōki
   mikkamā teyvam viyantueṭuttu uraitta         07-90
   cakkara vāḷak kōṭṭattu aṅkaṇ
   palarpukat tiṟanta pakuvāy vāyil
   ulaka aṟaviyiṉ orupuṭai iruttalum,
   kantuuṭai neṭunilaik kāraṇam kāṭṭiya
   antil eḻutiya aṟputap pāvai
   maittaṭaṅ kaṇṇāḷ mayaṅkiṉaḷ veruvat
   tippiyam uraikkum teyvak kiḷaviyiṉ
   iravi vaṉmaṉ oruperu makaḷē
   turakat tāṉait tuccayaṉ tēvi
   tayaṅkuiṇark kōtait tārai cāvuṟa        07-100
   mayaṅki yāṉaimuṉ maṉuyir nīttōy
   kārāḷar caṇpaiyil kaucikaṉ makaḷē
   māruta vēkaṉōṭu innakar pukuntu
   tārai tavvai taṉṉoṭu kūṭiya
   vīrai ākiya cutamati kēḷāy
   iṉṟuēḻ nāḷil iṭaiyiruḷ yāmattut
   taṉpiṟap pataṉoṭu niṉpiṟappu uṇarntuīṅku
   ilakkumi yākiya niṉakkuiḷai yāḷvarum
   añcaleṉṟu uraittatu avvurai kēṭṭu
   neñcam naṭukkuṟūum nēriḻai nallāḷ,         07-110
   kāva lāḷar kaṇtuyil koḷḷat
   tūmeṉ cēkkait tuyilkaṇ viḻippa
   valampuric caṅkam vaṟitueḻuntu ārppap
   pulampuric caṅkam poruḷoṭu muḻaṅkap
   pukarmuka vāraṇam neṭuṅkū viḷippap
   poṟimayir vāraṇam kuṟuṅkū viḷippap
   paṇainilaip puravi palaeḻuntu ālap
   paṇainilaip puḷḷum palaeḻuntu ālap
   pūmpoḻil ārkaip puḷoli ciṟappap
   pūṅkoṭi yārkaip puḷoli ciṟappak         07-120
   kaṭavuḷ pīṭikaip pūppali kaṭaikoḷak
   kalampakar pīṭikaip pūppali kaṭaikoḷak
   kuyiluvar kaṭaitoṟum paṇṇiyam parantueḻa
   koṭuppōr kaṭaitoṟum paṇṇiyam parantueḻa
   ūrtuyil eṭuppa uravunīr aḻuvattuk
   kāriruḷ cīttuk katiravaṉ muḷaittalum,
   ēuṟu maññaiyiṉ iṉaintatuaṭi varunta
   mānakar vīti maruṅkil pōkip
   pōya kaṅkulil pukuntatai ellām
   mātavi taṉakku vaḻuiṉṟu uraittalum         07-130
   nalmaṇi iḻanta nākam pōṉṟuavaḷ
   taṉmakaḷ vārāt taṉittuyar uḻappa
   iṉuyir iḻanta yākkaiyil iruntaṉaḷ
   tuṉṉiyatu uraitta cutamati tāṉeṉ.
   tuyil eḻuppiya kātai muṟṟiṟṟu.
   ----------------

           Chapter 7. The goddess wakes Sudhamathi in Manipallavam

   The goddess Manimekalai comes and speaks to the prince in the night
   After the goddess Manimekalai left Manipallavam island,
   leaving Manimekalai there, she went to prince Udayakumaran.
   The prince, feeling sad and lying on a soft bed,
   thought, “When the night is over, I will get Manimekalai,”
   and he was not able to sleep thinking about her.
   That very night, the goddess Manimekalai
   appeared before the prince and told him,
   “O prince, if a king holding a scepter
   does not rule properly and justly,
   the stars in the country will go on a wrong path,
   and if the stars do not go in the right way,
   it will not rain during the rainy season.
   If there is no rain, crops will not grow
   and the people will starve. 07-010
   A king, the protector of his country,
   should think that his citizens are his life.
   You should think of Manimekalai
   as a bhikshuni and consider that she is also your citizen.
   You should stop thinking of her and stop loving her.” 07-014
   The goddess Manimekalai wakes Sudhamathi
   After advising the prince, the goddess left him and went to Sudhamathi.
   She woke her and said,
   “Do not be afraid of me.
   I am the goddess Manimekalai.
   I came to this city to see the festival for Indra.
   This is the time for the vine-like young Manimekalai
   to follow the path of tapas.
   I flew through the sky with the ornamented Manimekalai
   to the faultless island Manipallavam and left her there. 07-020
   Your good friend, lovely as a vine,
   will come to your place after seven days.
   Even if she disguises herself
   and stays in this rich, guarded, happy city,
   she will not hide her true form from you.
   After she arrives here many things will happen
   to help her become a bhikshuni.
   Go and tell Mādhavi how I have met you
   and what has happened to her faultless daughter. 07-030
   Tell her also that Manimekalai did not do anything wrong
   or follow any bad ways.
   Mādhavi knows about me.
   The day she gave birth to her daughter, Kovalan said to her,
   ‘There is a goddess in the ocean where large waves roll,’
   and he named his beautiful daughter after me.
   That is how Manimekalai got her name.
   One night on an auspicious day,
   I appeared to Mādhavi in a dream and told her,
   ‘You gave birth to a divine girl
   and she will be a great devotee of Buddha and will do tapas.
   She will not fall into passion for anyone.
   Tell Mādhavi what I have told you.’
   After saying this, the goddess went away. 07-040
   Frightened, Sudhamathi woke up and was worried.
   A description of the evening and night in Pukār
   The dancing girls who performed with their teachers went to sleep.
   The musical instruments—the yāz, drum, flute and others—
   were silent and went to sleep also. 07-040
   There was no music from the stringed instruments
   because girls stopped playing them
   with their soft hands ornamented with bangles.
   Some wives were angry with their husbands
   because they had gone the houses of their mistresses,
   and when they slept with their husbands,
   their eyes were red with feigned anger,
   but still they embraced them
   as they slept on their fragrant beds. 07-050
   Children, ornamented with aimpadaithali,
   stopped babbling sweetly with their red mouths
   and playing with their small chariots,
   and, tired, went to sleep.
   Their foster mothers smeared veempu
   and ven cirukaduku on their children’s bodies
   so they would sleep well.
   Then only did they go to their beds and sleep.
   The doves in the houses, 7-060
   the birds that lived in the ponds,
   and the birds in the groves
   became quiet and went to sleep.
   The drums were stilled.
   Everything in that ancient city went to sleep.
   The sounds in the night.
   It was the middle of the night in Pukār.
   In Chakravālakkottam there were many sounds.
   The people caring for the water clocks
   in the palace of the king announced the time.
   Hungry elephants called for food
   because they had suffered without food from the morning.
   The guards beat their small drums as they watched the city
   and the sound of those drums spread
   in the large streets where chariots run
   and through the small streets and alleyways.
   The sound of the music of the ironsmiths, 7-070
   working on the boats that float on the roaring sea,
   spread as they drank toddy, grew intoxicated and sang.
   Women wearing a paste of margosa leaves
   and small white mustard seeds
   followed other women after they had given birth
   to keep spirits from coming near them
   as they went to bathe in ponds.
   Spreading everywhere, the shouting
   of strong tiger-like warriors was loud as thunder
   as they performed sacrifices at crossroads and called out,
   “May our king on his bannered chariot be victorious!” 7-080
   There was music of the magicians
   that relieves the pain of young women
   who have given birth for the first time
   and also calms other women after giving birth.
   The sound of people calling female peys
   to come to the sacrifices spread there.
   Sudhamathi heard all the sounds
   in the night in Chakravālakkottam and was afraid.
   She walked through the small entrance in the west side of the wall
   and arrived at the large entrance of Chakravālakkottam
   that the goddess Manimekalai had described.
   Many people were entering to go to the ashrams there.
   She went through the door and waited on one side. 7-090
   The Kanthil Pāvai
   The past life of Sudhamathi and Mādhavi
   In the Chakravālakkottam,
   Mayan, the carpenter of the gods
   had made a wonderful statue, the Kanthil Pāvai,
   and it came before Sudhamathi.
   It tells the past and future lives of all people
   and it began to tell the past and future life of Sudhamathi and
   Mādhavi. 07-098
   Kanthil Pāvai appears and tells Sudhamathi her previous life.
   The Pāvai said, “In a former birth,
   you were the daughter of Ravivarman, the king of Yasodhara,
   and you were married to Duchayan,
   the king of the land of Kacchayam with a large army of horses.
   When you heard your sister Thārai had died,
   you fainted and an elephant killed you. 07-100
   In your next birth, you were born to Kausigan.
   Your father belonged to the Kārālar tribe in Sanbai city.
   and he named you Veerai.
   After that Thārai your sister was born as Mādhavi
   and Lakshmi, your other sister, was born to Mādhavi as Manimekalai.
   Mādhavi and Manimekalai were both born in Kāvirippumpatinam.
   O Sudhamathi, do not be afraid of me.
   Your sister Lakshmi, born as the daughter Manimekalai to Mādhavi,
   will come to know her past and future lives on Manipallavam island
   and then come here in the middle of the night
   after seven days to join you.”
   Sudhamathi heard the Kanthil Pāvai’s words, trembled and woke up.
   07-110
   Description of the morning.
   Dawn arrives.
   After being up all night, the guards went to sleep.
   The couples sleeping on soft clean beds woke up.
   The Valampuri conches began to sound
   without any worry that they were waking everyone.
   Erudite poets recited their poems loudly
   to the sounding of the conches.
   Elephants with dotted faces trumpeted.
   Horses, arrayed in lines, woke up and moved about.
   Birds on the branches of the trees woke up and sang.
   Bees flying in the blooming groves drank honey and hummed. 07-120
   Merchants, musicians and others wake up.
   The bracelets on the hands of beautiful vine-like women jingled.
   The sacrifices made to the gods with flowers were finishing.
   Ornament merchants worshiped gods and sprinkled flowers on them.
   Musicians played their instruments at the entrances of houses
   and the sound spread everywhere.
   The entrances of the houses of generous people
   were filled with many things to give to the poor.
   The sun, banishing the darkness of night,
   rose over the sea, waking everyone.
   Sudhamathi sees Mādhavi.
   Sudhamathi, worried and suffering like a peacock pierced by an arrow,
   went along the streets of the large city, walking so her feet hurt.
   She went to Mādhavi and told her everything
   that had happened to her in the night. 07-130
   Mādhavi, unable to see her daughter,
   suffered like a snake that has lost its precious jewel.
   Thinking of Manimekalai, Sudhamathi stayed there without moving
   like a body that has lost its sweet life. 07-134
   ----------------
                        ____________________________

                 8. maṇipallavattut tuyar uṟṟa kātai
[ maṇimēkalai maṇipallavattut tuyil eḻuntu tuyaruṟṟa pāṭṭu ]

   īṅkuivaḷ iṉṉaṇa māka iruṅkaṭal
   vāṅkutirai uṭutta maṇipal lavattiṭait
   tattunīr aṭaikaraic caṅkuuḻu toṭuppiṉ
   muttuviḷai kaḻaṉi muricem pavaḷamoṭu
   viraimaram uruṭṭum tiraiulāp parappiṉ
   ñāḻal ōṅkiya tāḻkaṇ acumpiṉ
   āmpalum kuvaḷaiyum tāmpuṇarntu mayaṅki
   vaṇṭuuṇa malarnta kuṇṭunīr ilañci
   muṭakkāl puṉṉaiyum maṭalpūn tāḻaiyum
   veyilvaravu oḻitta payilpūm pantar         08-10
   aṟalviḷaṅku nilāmaṇal naṟumalarp paḷḷit
   tuñcu tuyil eḻūum amcil ōti
   kātal cuṟṟam maṟantu kaṭaikoḷa
   vēṟuiṭattup piṟanta uyirē pōṉṟu
   paṇṭuaṟi kiḷaiyoṭu patiyum kāṇāḷ
   kaṇṭuaṟi yātaṉa kaṇṇiṟ kāṇā
   nīla mākkaṭal neṭṭiṭai aṉṟiyum
   kālai ñāyiṟu katirvirittu muḷaippa
   uvavaṉa maruṅkiṉil ōriṭam kolitu
   cutamati oḷittāy tuyaram ceytaṉai         08-20
   naṉavō kaṉavō eṉpatai aṟiyēṉ
   maṉanaṭuk kuṟūum māṟṟam tārāy
   valiruḷ kaḻintatu mātavi mayaṅkum
   elvaḷai vārāy viṭṭuakaṉ ṟaṉaiyō
   viñcaiyil tōṉṟiya viḷaṅkiḻai maṭavāḷ
   vañcam ceytaṉaḷ kollō aṟiyēṉ
   orutaṉi añcuveṉ tiruvē vāveṉat
   tiraitavaḻ paṟavaiyum viriciṟaip paṟavaiyum
   eḻuntuvīḻ cillaiyum oṭuṅkuciṟai muḻuvalum
   aṉṉac cēval araca ṉākap         08-30
   paṉṉiṟap puḷiṉam parantuoruṅku īṇṭip
   pācaṟai maṉṉar pāṭi pōla
   vīcunīrp parappiṉ etiretir irukkum
   tuṟaiyum tuṟaicūḻ neṭumaṇal kuṉṟamum
   yāṅkaṇum tirivōḷ pāṅkiṉam kāṇāḷ
   kuraltalaik kūntal kulaintupiṉ vīḻa
   araṟṟiṉaḷ kūuy aḻutaṉaḷ ēṅki,
   vīḻtuyar eytiya viḻumak kiḷaviyil
   tāḻtuyar uṟuvōḷ tantaiyai uḷḷi
   emitil paṭuttum vevviṉai uruppak         08-40
   kōltoṭi mātaroṭu vēṟṟunāṭu aṭaintu
   vaivāḷ uḻanta maṇippūṇ akalattu
   aiyā vōeṉṟu aḻuvōḷ muṉṉar
   virintuilaṅku aviroḷi ciṟantukatir parappi
   uraipeṟu mummuḻam nilamicai ōṅkit
   ticaitoṟum oṉpāṉ muḻunilam akaṉṟu
   vitimāṇ āṭiyiṉ vaṭṭam kuyiṉṟu
   patuma caturam mīmicai viḷaṅki
   aṟavōṟku amainta ācaṉam eṉṟē
   naṟumalar allatu piṟamaram coriyātu         08-50
   paṟavaiyum mutirciṟai pāṅkuceṉṟu atirātu
   tēvarkōṉ iṭṭa māmaṇip pīṭikai
   piṟappuviḷaṅku aviroḷi aṟattakai ācaṉam
   kīḻnila maruṅkiṉ nākanāṭu āḷum
   iruvar maṉṉavar oruvaḻit tōṉṟi
   ematuītu eṉṟē eṭukkal āṟṟār
   tamperum paṟṟu nīṅkalum nīṅkār
   ceṅkaṇ civantu neñcupukai uyirttut
   tamperuñ cēṉaiyoṭu veñcamam purināḷ
   iruñceru oḻimiṉ ematuītu eṉṟē         08-60
   peruntava muṉivaṉ iruntuaṟam uraikkum
   poruaṟu ciṟappil puraiyōr ēttum
   taruma pīṭikai tōṉṟiyatu āṅku eṉ.
   maṇipallavattut tuyar uṟṟa kātai muṟṟiṟṟu.
   ------------------

                   Chapter 8. Manimekalai in Manipallavam

   A description of Manipallavam Island
   On the seashore of the large ocean, pearls flourish,
   conches are spread out like seeds, waves roll in with red coral
   and sandalwood and akil trees spread their fragrance.
   On the bank where the nyāzhal trees grow
   ambal and kuvalai flowers bloom together
   as bees drink honey from them,
   and there are punnai trees with bent branches,
   and tāzhai plants flower.
   On that beautiful island
   Manimekalai was sleeping on the sand white as moonlight
   where flowers had fallen and made a bed. 08-010
   She got up, her hair beautiful even in the morning.
   As she looked around
   she felt like a soul that has been born in a different land
   in a new place without its close relatives.
   She could not see anyone she knew
   and could not understand where she was.
   She saw things that she had never seen before.
   She could only see the blue wide ocean
   as the sun rose spreading its bright rays.
   Manimekalai worried and said,
   “Is this place near Ubavanam?
   Sudhamathi, where are you hiding? 08-020
   I am confused and do not know whether this is real or a dream.
   My heart trembles. Answer me.
   The darkness is disappearing
   and the night is going away.
   O Sudhamathi with beautiful bracelets,
   aren’t you a friend of my mother Mādhavi?
   Come to me—where did you go?
   Did the young shining goddess wearing lovely ornaments
   come from the sky to cheat us and disappear?
   I do not know what happened.
   I am alone and I am afraid.
   My precious one, come!”
   Manimekalai did not know what to do.
   She saw the ocean and the birds flying around the waves.
   The birds all gathered in a flock—
   some opened their wings,
   some kept their wings closed.
   A swan that stood in front of them looked like their king, 08-030
   and the water looked like the camp of his army
   when he was fighting a war.
   She wandered all around the seashore
   and the tall sand dunes surrounded with water.
   She could not see anyone she knew.
   She was sad and had not even combed her hair.
   She sobbed and cried.
   Longing to see people she knew,
   she thought of her father and, sad, 08-040
   she said “O father, because of your bad fate
   you went with your wife adorned with bangles
   to a foreign country and were killed by the Pandiyan king.”
   The Buddha Peedihai, placed there by Indra, appears before Manimekalai
   At that time the Buddha Peedihai,
   the seat of the Buddha, appeared before her.
   It shone spreading its rays.
   It was round and made of marble,
   four and a half feet high
   and thirteen and a half feet wide in each direction.
   On it was a square in the form of a lotus,`
   a suitable seat for Buddha, the god of dharma.
   Only fragrant trees shed their flowers on it—no other trees did so.
   No birds went near it to flap their wings. 08-050
   The seat of the Peedihai was studded
   with beautiful jewels given by Indra, the king of the gods,
   and that shining Peedihai tells people the events of their future
   lives.
   The story of the Buddha Peedihai
   In the east in Nāganadu, two kings
   constantly fought with one another
   to obtain the Buddha Peedihai,
   each claiming it for himself
   and never relenting in his desire to obtain it.
   They went to the war with large armies and fought.
   One day as they were fighting,
   a Buddhist sage came to them and said,
   “Do not fight—it belongs to me!”
   and took it from them.
   This is the story of the Dharma Peedihai
   worshiped by all famous people. 08-063
   ------------
                        ____________________________

             9. pīṭikai kaṇṭu piṟappu uṇarnta kātai
[ maṇimēkalai maṇipallavattiṭaip pīṭikaikaṇṭu piṟappu uṇarnta pāṭṭu ]

   āṅkuatu kaṇṭa āyiḻai aṟiyāḷ
   kāntaḷam ceṅkai talaimēl kuvintaṉa
   talaimēl kuvinta kaiyaḷ ceṅkaṇ
   mulaimēl kaluḻntumut tattiraḷ ukuttuatiṉ
   iṭamuṟai mummuṟai valamuṟai vārāk
   koṭimiṉ mukiloṭu nilañcērn teṉṉa
   iṟunucuppu alaca veṟunilam cērntuāṅku
   eḻuvōḷ piṟappu vaḻuiṉṟu uṇarntu
   toḻutakai mātava! tuṇiporuḷ uṇarntōy!
   kāyaṅ karaiyil uraittatai ellām         09-10
   vāyē ākutal mayakkuaṟa uṇarntēṉ
   kāntāram eṉṉum kaḻiperu nāṭṭup
   pūruva tēyam poṟaikeṭa vāḻum
   atti patieṉum aracāḷ vēntaṉ
   maittuṉaṉ ākiya pirama tarumaṉ!
   āṅkuavaṉ taṉpāl aṇaintuaṟaṉ uraippōy
   tīṅkaṉi nāval ōṅkumit tīviṭai
   iṉṟuēḻ nāḷil irunila mākkaḷ
   niṉṟunaṭukku eyta nīḷnila vēntē
   pūmi naṭukkuṟūum pōḻtattu innakar         09-20
   nākanal nāṭṭu nāṉūṟu yōcaṉai
   viyaṉpā talattu vīḻntukēṭu eytum
   itaṉpāl oḻikeṉa,
   māperum pērūr makkaṭku ellām
   āvum māvum koṇṭukaḻika eṉṟē
   paṟaiyil cāṟṟi niṟaiarun tāṉaiyōṭu
   iṭavayam eṉṉum irumpati nīṅki
   vaṭavayiṉ avanti mānakarc celvōṉ
   kāyaṅ karaieṉum pēriyāṟṟu aṭaikaraic
   cēyuyar pūmpoḻil pāṭiceytu iruppa,         09-30
   eṅkōṉ nīāṅku uraittaan nāḷiṭait
   taṅkātu annakar vīḻntukēṭu eytalum
   maruḷaṟu pulava!niṉ malaraṭi ataṉai
   aracoṭu makkaḷ ellām īṇṭic
   cūḻntaṉar vaṇaṅkit tāḻntupala ēttiya
   aruḷaṟam pūṇṭa orupēr iṉpattu
   ulakutuyar keṭuppa aruḷiya annāḷ,
   aravak kaṭaloli acōtaram āḷum
   iravi vaṉmaṉ oruperun tēvi
   alattakac cīṟaṭi amuta pativayiṟṟu         09-40
   ilakkumi eṉṉum peyarpeṟṟup piṟantēṉ
   atti patieṉum aracaṉ peruntēvi
   cittipuram āḷum cītaraṉ tirumakaḷ
   nīla patieṉum nēriḻai vayiṟṟil
   kālai ñāyiṟṟuk katirpōl tōṉṟiya
   irākulaṉ taṉakkup pukkēṉ avaṉoṭu
   parāaru marapiṉniṉ pātam paṇitalum,
   eṭṭuiru nāḷiliv irākulaṉ taṉṉait
   tiṭṭi viṭamuṇum celuyir pōṉāl
   tīaḻal avaṉoṭu cēyiḻai mūḻkuvai;         09-50
   ētu nikaḻcci īṅkuiṉṟu ākaliṉ
   kavērak kaṉṉip peyaroṭu viḷaṅkiya
   tavākkaḷi mūtūrc ceṉṟupiṟappu eytuti;
   aṇiyiḻai niṉakkuōr aruntuyar varunāḷ
   maṇimē kalāteyvam vantu tōṉṟi
   aṉṟuap patiyil āriruḷ eṭuttut
   teṉticai maruṅkilōr tīviṭai vaittalum
   vēka ventiṟal nākanāṭṭu aracar
   ciṉamācu oḻittu maṉamācu tīrttuāṅku
   aṟaccevi tiṟantu maṟaccevi aṭaittup        09-60
   piṟavippiṇi maruttuvaṉ iruntuaṟam uraikkum
   tiruntuoḷi ācaṉam ceṉṟukai toḻuti;
   aṉṟaip pakalē uṉpiṟappu uṇarntuīṅku
   iṉṟuyāṉ uraitta uraiteḷi vāyeṉa,
   cātuyar kēṭṭut taḷarntuuku maṉattēṉ
   kātalaṉ piṟappum kāṭṭā yōeṉa
   āṅkuuṉaik koṇarnta arumperun teyvam
   pāṅkil tōṉṟip paintoṭi kaṇavaṉai
   īṅkuivaṉ eṉṉum eṉṟueṭuttu ōtiṉai
   āṅkuat teyvatam vārā tōeṉa         09-70
   ēṅkiṉaḷ aḻūum iḷaṅkoṭi tāṉeṉ.
   pīṭikai kaṇṭu piṟappu uṇarnta kātai muṟṟiṟṟu.
   -------------

               Chapter 9. The Buddha Peedihai and Manimekalai

   The Buddha Peedihai tells Manimekalai her previous life
   Manimekalai adorned with precious ornaments
   was puzzled seeing the Buddha Peedihai before her.
   She put her hands, beautiful as kānthal flowers,
   above her head and worshiped it.
   Her lovely eyes shed pearl-like tears on her breasts.
   She circled the Peedihai from left to right three times,
   then fell to the floor, bowing and touching her waist to the ground.
   When she rose she realized that birth and death are true
   and knew her past birth. 09-010
   Manimekalai worshiped the Buddha Peedihai and said to it,
   “O great one, I worship you.
   You know what is true—I now know beyond doubt
   that all that you said in Kāyangarai is true. 09-010
   Manimekalai repeats to the Buddha Peedihai what it told about her life.
   The story of the king Brahmadarman
   Brahmadarman was the brother-in-law of Adipathi,
   the king of Purva Desam in Kāndāram,
   where the people lived happily, observing dharma.
   O you who tell the ways of dharma to all, you told him,
   ‘O king, on this island where fruit trees flourish,
   there will be an earthquake in seven days,
   and it will destroy the country.
   Nāganadu will fall four thousand yojanas
   into the ground and be destroyed.
   You and your people should leave this place.’ 09-020
   Hearing you, the king of the great country
   ordered his servants to beat drums and told them to proclaim,
   ‘O people, you all should take all your cattle
   and horses and leave this land.’
   All the people left
   and the king also left with his army
   and went north to a city called Avanthi.
   On the way he stayed in a camp, with his army
   on the bank of the great river Kāyangarai. 09 -030
   At that time, just as you said, O faultless wise one, the city was
   destroyed.
   The king and all the people of the country came to you
   and bowed to your lotus feet,
   and you gave your grace to all and removed their troubles. 09-040
   The story of Manimekalai born as Lakshmi to Amudapathi
   At that time I was born to Amudapathi,
   the queen of the king Ravivarman
   and they named me Lakshmi.
   Rāgulan, a son as bright as the morning sun,
   had been born to Neelapathi,
   the beautiful daughter of Shripathi, the king of Chitipuram.
   He married me.
   After my marriage, I and Rāgulan
   came to you and worshiped you, and you said to me,
   ‘In eight days a snake will bite Rāgulan
   and you will enter into fire and die.’ 09-050
   O lord Buddha Peedihai, you also said,
   ‘O you adorned with beautiful ornaments,
   you will be born in Thavākkali Mudur
   and your name will be Kavera Kanni.
   At that time the goddess Manimekalai will come to you
   and take you in the night to an island in the south.’ 09-053
   You told me that I will know my previous birth
   from you, the divine Buddha Peedihai.
   You also told me that on the island I will find a divine Buddha
   Peedihai,
   where the Buddha, the remedy for all sickness,
   is seated on a bright seat. 09-060
   You said when I worship that Buddha Peedihai
   I will know my previous life
   and will understand everything
   you told me on the bank of the river, Kāyangarai.”
   Manimekalai felt sad in her heart and asked the Peedihai,
   “Won’t you show me where my husband is?
   You told me that a goddess brought me here
   and she will tell me who my husband is.”
   Manimekalai was waiting for the goddess to come
   to take her to her home. 09-071
   ------------
                        ____________________________

                        10. mantiram koṭutta kātai
   [ maṇimēkalāteyvam vantutōṉṟi mantiram koṭutta pāṭṭu ]

   aṟavōṉ ācaṉattu āyiḻai aṟinta
   piṟaviyaḷ āyiṉaḷ peṟṟiyum aitueṉa
   viraimalar ēnti vicumpūṭu iḻintu
   poruaṟu pūṅkoṭi pūmiyil polinteṉa
   vantu tōṉṟiya maṇimē kalāteyvam
   muntaip piṟappueyti niṉṟōḷ kēṭpa,
   uyirkaḷ ellām uṇarvupāḻ ākip
   poruḷvaḻaṅku cevittuḷai tūrntuaṟivu iḻanta
   vaṟantalai ulakattu aṟampāṭu ciṟakkac
   cuṭarvaḻakku aṟṟut taṭumāṟu kālaiōr         10-10
   iḷavaḷa ñāyiṟu tōṉṟiyatu eṉṉa
   nīyō tōṉṟiṉai niṉaṭi paṇintēṉ
   nīyē ākiniṟku amaintaiv ācaṉam
   nāmicai vaittēṉ talaimicaik koṇṭēṉ
   pūmicai ēṟṟiṉēṉ pulampuaṟuka eṉṟē
   valamkoṇṭu ācaṉam vaṇaṅkuvōḷ muṉṉar,
   polaṅkoṭi nilamicaic cērntueṉap porunti
   uṉtiru aruḷāl eṉpiṟappu uṇarntēṉ
   eṉperuṅ kaṇavaṉ yāṅkuuḷaṉ eṉṟalum,
   ilakkumi kēḷāy irākulaṉ taṉṉoṭu         10-20
   pulattakai eytiṉai pūmpoḻil akavayiṉ
   iṭaṅkaḻi kāmamoṭu aṭaṅkā ṉāyavaṉ
   maṭantai meliyal malaraṭi vaṇaṅkuḻic
   cātu cakkaraṉ mīvicumpu tirivōṉ
   terumaral oḻittuāṅku irattiṉa tīvattut
   taruma cakkaram uruṭṭiṉaṉ varuvōṉ
   veṅkatir amayattu viyaṉpoḻil akavayiṉ
   vantu tōṉṟalum mayaṅkiṉai kalaṅki
   meliyal kaṇṭaṉai meynnaṭuk kuṟṟaṉai
   nalkūr nucuppiṉai nāṇiṉai iṟaiñca         10-30
   irākulaṉ vantōṉ yāreṉa vekuḷalum
   virāmalark kūntal avaṉvāy putaiyā
   vāṉūṭu iḻintōṉ malaraṭi vaṇaṅkātu
   nānal kūrntaṉai eṉṟuavaṉ taṉṉoṭu
   pakaiaṟu pāttiyaṉ pātam paṇintuāṅku,
   amara kēḷniṉ tamaralam āyiṉum
   amtīm taṇṇīr amutoṭu koṇarkēm
   uṇṭi yāmuṉ kuṟippiṉam eṉṟalum
   emaṉai uṇkēṉ īṅkuk koṇarkeṉa
   annāḷ avaṉuṇ ṭaruḷiya avvaṟam         10-40
   niṉāṅku oḻiyātu niṉpiṟappu aṟuttiṭum.
   uvavaṉa maruṅkil uṉpāl tōṉṟiya
   utaya kumaraṉ avaṉuṉ irākulaṉ
   āṅkuavaṉ aṉṟiyum avaṉpāl uḷḷam
   nīṅkāt taṉmai niṉakkumuṇṭu ākaliṉ
   kanta cāliyiṉ kaḻiperu vittuōr
   ventuuku veṇkaḷar vīḻvatu pōṉmeṉa
   aṟattiṉ vittāṅku ākiya uṉṉaiōr
   tiṟappaṭaṟku ētuvāc cēyiḻai ceytēṉ.
   iṉṉum kēḷāy ilakkumi! nīniṉ         10-50
   tavvaiyar āvōr tāraiyum vīraiyum
   āṅkuavar tammai aṅkanāṭṭu akavayiṉ
   kaccayam āḷum kaḻalkāl vēntaṉ
   tuccayaṉ eṉpōṉ oruvaṉ koṇṭaṉaṉ
   avaruṭaṉ āṅkuavaṉ akalmalai āṭik
   kaṅkaip pēryāṟṟu aṭaikarai iruntuḻi
   maṟavaṇam nītta mācuaṟu kēḷvi
   aṟavaṇaṉ āṅkuavaṉ pālceṉ ṟōṉai
   īṅku vantīr yāreṉṟu eḻuntuavaṉ
   pāṅkuuḷi mātavaṉ pātam paṇitalum         10-60
   āti mutalvaṉ aṟavāḻi āḷvōṉ
   mātuyar evvam makkaḷai nīkki
   vilaṅkum tammuḷ verūumpakai nīkki
   uṭaṅkuuyir vāḻkaeṉṟu uḷḷam kacintuukat
   toṉṟukā lattu niṉṟuaṟam uraitta
   kuṉṟam maruṅkil kuṟṟam keṭukkum
   pāta paṅkayam kiṭattaliṉ īṅkuitu
   pātapaṅ kayamalai eṉumpeyarttu āyatu
   toḻutuvalam koḷḷa vantēṉ īṅkuip
   paḻutuil kāṭciyīr nīyirum toḻumeṉa         10-70
   aṉṟuavaṉ uraitta avvurai piḻaiyātu
   ceṉṟukai toḻutu ciṟappuc ceytaliṉ
   mātavi ākiyum cutamati ākiyum
   kōtaiam cāyal niṉṉoṭu kūṭiṉar.
   aṟipiṟappu uṟṟaṉai aṟampāṭu aṟintaṉai
   piṟaaṟam uraippōr peṟṟiyum kēṭkuvai
   palvēṟu camayap paṭiṟṟuurai ellām
   alliyaṅ kōtai kēṭkuṟum annāḷ
   iḷaiyaḷ vaḷaiyōḷ eṉṟuuṉakku yāvarum
   viḷaiporuḷ uraiyār vēṟṟuuru eytavum,         10-80
   antaram tiriyavum ākkumiv aruntiṟal
   mantiram koḷkeṉa vāymaiyiṉ ōti
   matināḷ muṟṟiya maṅkalat tirunāḷ
   potuaṟivu ikaḻntu pulamuṟu mātavaṉ
   tiruaṟam eytutal cittameṉṟu uṇarnī
   maṉperum pīṭikai vaṇaṅkiṉai ētti
   niṉpatip pukuvāy eṉṟueḻuntu ōṅki,
   maṟantatum uṇṭueṉa maṟittuāṅku iḻintu
   ciṟanta koḷkaic cēyiḻai kēḷāy
   makkaḷ yākkai uṇaviṉ piṇṭam         10-90
   ipperu mantiram irumpaci aṟukkumeṉṟu
   āṅkuatu koṭuttuāṅku antaram eḻuntu
   nīṅkiyatu āṅku neṭunteyvam tāṉeṉ.
   mantiram koṭutta kātai muṟṟiṟṟu.
   -----------

      Chapter 10. The story of Sādhu Chakran and Manimekalai (Lakshmi)

   When the goddess saw that Manimekalai
   knew her past birth from the Buddha Peedihai, she was pleased.
   She took some fragrant flowers
   and came down from the sky to earth,
   looking like a blossoming vine.
   The goddess worshiped the Buddha Peedihai and said,
   “At this time on the earth,
   when all the creatures in the world are losing their wisdom
   and do not want to listen to the dharma
   so that the world suffers with poverty, 10-010
   you appeared as a young wonderful sun to brighten this world.
   I bow to your feet.
   My tongue praises this seat that is fit for you.
   May the troubles of this world vanish.”
   The goddess went around the Peedihai and worshiped it.
   Manimekalai came before the goddess Manimekalai,
   fell on the ground, bowed to her and asked, “I know my past birth
   because of your grace.
   Where is my dear husband?” 10-020
   The goddess Manimekalai tells Manimekalai the story of Sadhu Chakran.
   Rāgulan and Lakshmi (Manimekalai in a previous birth)
   The goddess said,
   “Listen, in your previous birth your name was Lakshmi.
   One time in a flower garden
   you were having a love fight with your husband Rāgulan,
   and he, excited with passion, bowed to your soft lotus feet.
   At that time a sage Sadhu Chakran was wandering in the sky
   going to an island called Rattinatheevu.
   He came here to this cool grove with a wheel of dharma in his hand.
   You were ashamed because your husband was bowing to you
   while you, your thin waist shivering, were bowing to Sadhu Chakran.
   10-030
   O you with fragrant hair,
   when he saw you and the sage, Rāgulan became angry and asked you,
   ‘Who is that person who has just come here?’
   You closed Rāgulan’s mouth with your hand and told him,
   ‘A sage came from the sky—you should not be angry with him.
   We should bow and worship his feet.’
   Then you both bowed to his feet and said,
   ‘O holy one, hear what we would say.
   Even though we are not your devotees,
   we will bring you sweet water and food.
   Please eat and drink. We will do whatever you wish.’
   The sage said, ‘Mother, I will eat—bring some food.
   The good deed of feeding a sage will remove your future birth.’ 10 -040
   Udayakumaran, the prince who came to the flower garden
   and saw you was your husband Rāgulan.
   Just as he is attracted to you, you will also love him
   and you will not be able to forget him.
   Your mind is like land where kandasali paddy grows—
   it should not get spoiled turning brackish. 10-050
   I do not want you to fall in love with Udayakumaran,
   O you adorned with beautiful ornaments,
   and that is why I took you to the island of Manipallavam.” 10-050
   The story of Thārai and Veerai (who this birth are Mādhavi and
   Sudhamathi)
   The goddess said, “Manimekalai, listen.
   Your elder sisters were Thārai and Veerai
   and they were married to Thuchayan, the ankleted king of Anganadu.
   Once he went with his wives to the high mountains to play
   and stayed on the shores of the great river Ganges.
   When they were there, Aravanar, a faultless, wise Buddhist sage came.
   You went to the sage, worshiped his feet and asked him, 10-060
   ‘Why did you come here?’ The sage replied,
   ‘On this hill are the faultless lotus footprints of lord Buddha.
   He, the ancient god, holds the wheel of dharma.
   He removes the birth and death of all people and creatures
   and takes away their troubles.
   He abides on this hill and, melting in his heart,
   gives his grace to all creatures to live without hatred.
   The lord Buddha stays here, on this hill, and preaches his dharma,
   and so this hill has the sacred lotus footprints of lord Buddha
   and is called Pāda Pangaya hills.
   I came here to circumambulate this hill
   and worship the feet of the lord Buddha.
   O faultless one, you should also come and worship this hill.’ 10-070
   O beautiful Manimekalai,
   you worshiped the sage and gave him respect.
   Because he gave you his grace, Thārai and Veerai were born
   as Mādhavi and Sudhamathi in this birth and you know them.
   O you with alli flowers in your hair,
   you know your previous births, you know what the dharma is,
   and you know the many philosophies of religious scholars.
   When religious scholars tell you their false philosophies
   they will not tell you much about their religion
   because they think you merely a young woman adorned with bangles.
   10-080
   I will give you a rare mantra that enables you
   to take other forms and to fly in the sky.
   On the auspicious day of the full moon
   you will know that you will escape
   the common perception of this world
   and attain the sacred dharma of lord Buddha.
   This will be true—understand!
   Worship this great Peedihai and go to your home.”
   The goddess was going to leave her,
   but it returned to her again and said,
   “I forgot to tell you one thing,
   O you with beautiful ornaments.
   Hear me. The bodies of people are made of food only. 10-090
   This mantra I will give you will remove hunger of all.”
   Saying that, the great goddess gave her another mantra
   and rose to the sky. 10-093

               Part 3. The Amudhasurabhi and Young Āputhiran
                       11. pāttiram peṟṟa kātai
   [ maṇimēkalaikkut tīvatilakai kōmuki eṉṉum poykaiyil eḻunta
                      pāttiram koṭutta pāṭṭu ]

   maṇimē kalāteyvam nīṅkiya piṉṉar
   maṇipal lavattiṭai maṇimē kalaitāṉ
   veṇmaṇal kuṉṟamum viripūñ cōlaiyum
   taṇmalarp poykaiyum tāḻntaṉaḷ nōkkik
   kāvatam tiriyak kaṭavuḷ kōlattut
   tīva tilakai cevvaṉan tōṉṟik
   kalamkaviḻ makaḷiriṉ vantuīṅku eytiya
   ilaṅkutoṭi nallāy yārnī eṉṟalum,
   eppiṟap pakattuḷ yārnī eṉṟatu
   poṉkoṭi aṉṉāy poruntik kēḷāy         11-10
   pōya piṟaviyil pūmiyaṅ kiḻavaṉ
   irākulaṉ maṉaiyāṉ ilakkumi eṉpēr
   āya piṟaviyil āṭalaṅ kaṇikai
   mātavi īṉṟa maṇimē kalaiyāṉ
   eṉpeyart teyvam īṅkueṉaik koṇaraim
   maṉperum pīṭikai eṉpiṟappu uṇarntēṉ
   īṅkueṉ varavuituīṅku eytiya payaṉitu
   pūṅkoṭi aṉṉāy yārnī eṉṟalum,
   āyiḻai taṉpiṟappu aṟintamai aṟinta
   tīva tilakai cevvaṉam uraikkum         11-20
   īṅkuitaṉ ayalakattu irattiṉa tīvattu
   ōṅkuuyar camantattu ucci mīmicai
   aṟaviyaṅ kiḻavōṉ aṭiiṇai ākiya
   piṟavi eṉṉum peruṅkaṭal viṭūum
   aṟavi nāvāy āṅkuuḷatu ātaliṉ
   toḻutuvalam koṇṭu vantēṉ īṅkup
   paḻutuil kāṭciin naṉmaṇip pīṭikai
   tēvarkōṉ ēvaliṉ kāval pūṇṭēṉ
   tīva tilakai eṉpeyar itukēḷ:
   taruma talaivaṉ talaimaiyiṉ uraitta         11-30
   perumaicāl nalaṟam piṟaḻā nōṉpiṉar
   kaṇṭukai toḻuvōr kaṇṭataṉ piṉṉarp
   paṇṭaip piṟaviyar ākuvar paintoṭi
   ariyar ulakattu ākuavarkku aṟamoḻi
   uriyatu ulakattu orutalai yāka
   āṅṅaṉam ākiya aṇiyiḻai itukēḷ
   īṅkuip perumpeyarp pīṭikai muṉṉatu
   māmalark kuvaḷaiyum neytalum mayaṅkiya
   kōmuki eṉṉum koḻunīr ilañci
   irutuiḷa vēṉilil erikatir iṭapattu         11-40
   orupatiṉ mēlum orumūṉṟu ceṉṟapiṉ
   mīṉattu iṭainilai mīṉattu akavaiyiṉ
   pōtit talaivaṉoṭu poruntit tōṉṟum
   āput tiraṉkai amuta curapieṉum
   māperum pāttiram maṭakkoṭi kēḷāy
   annāḷ innāḷ appoḻutu ippoḻutu
   niṉāṅku varuvatu pōlum nēriḻai
   āṅkuatiṉ peyta āruyir maruntu
   vāṅkunar kaiyakam varuttutal allatu
   tāṉtolaivu illāt takaimaiyatu ākum         11-50
   naṟumalark kōtai niṉūr āṅkaṇ
   aṟavaṇaṉ taṉpāl kēṭkuvai itaṉtiṟam
   eṉṟuavaḷ uraittalum, -iḷaṅkoṭi virumpi
   maṉperum pīṭikai toḻutaṉaḷ vaṇaṅkit
   tīva tilakai taṉṉoṭum kūṭik
   kōmuki valamceytu koḷkaiyiṉ niṟṟalum
   eḻuntuvalam purinta iḷaṅkoṭi ceṅkaiyil
   toḻuntakai marapiṉ pāttiram pukutalum.
   pāttiram peṟṟa paintoṭi maṭavāḷ
   māttirai iṉṟi maṉamakiḻ eyti         11-60
   māraṉai vellum vīra niṉaṭi
   tīneṟik kaṭumpakai kaṭintōy niṉaṭi
   piṟarkkuaṟam muyalum periyōy niṉaṭi
   tuṟakkam vēṇṭāt tollōy niṉaṭi
   eṇpiṟakku oḻiya iṟantōy niṉaṭi
   kaṇpiṟarkku aḷikkum kaṇṇōy niṉaṭi
   tīmoḻikku aṭaitta ceviyōy niṉaṭi
   vāymoḻi ciṟanta nāvōy niṉṉaṭi
   narakar tuyarkeṭa naṭappōy niṉaṭi
   urakar tuyaram oḻippōy niṉaṭi         11-70
   vaṇaṅkutal allatu vāḻttaleṉ nāviṟku
   aṭaṅkātu eṉṟa āyiḻai muṉṉar,
   pōti nīḻal poruntit tōṉṟum
   nātaṉ pātam navaikeṭa ēttit
   tīva tilakai cēyiḻaikkum uraikkum:
   kuṭippiṟappu aḻikkum viḻuppam kollum
   piṭitta kalvip perumpuṇai viṭūum
   nāṇaṇi kaḷaiyum māṇeḻil citaikkum
   pūṇmulai mātaroṭu puṟaṅkaṭai niṟuttum
   pacippiṇi eṉṉum pāviatu tīrttōr         11-80
   icaiccol aḷavaikku eṉnā nimirātu
   pulmaram pukaiyap pukaiaḻal poṅki
   maṉuyir maṭiya maḻaivaḷam karattaliṉ
   aracutalai nīṅkiya arumaṟai antaṇaṉ
   irunila maruṅkiṉ yāṅkaṇum tirivōṉ
   arumpaci kaḷaiya āṟṟuvatu kāṇāṉ
   tiruntā nāyūṉ tiṉṉutal uṟuvōṉ
   intira ciṟappuc ceyvōṉ muṉṉar
   vantu tōṉṟiya vāṉavar peruntakai
   maḻaivaḷam tarutaliṉ maṉuyir ōṅkip         11-90
   piḻaiyā viḷaiyuḷum perukiyatu aṉṟō
   āṟṟunarkku aḷippōr aṟavilai pakarvōr
   āṟṟā mākkaḷ arumpaci kaḷaivōr
   ulakiṉ meynneṟi vāḻkkai
   maṇtiṇi ñālattu vāḻvōrkku ellām
   uṇṭi koṭuttōr uyirkoṭut tōrē
   uyirkkoṭai pūṇṭa uravōy ākik
   kayakkuaṟu nalaṟam kaṇṭaṉai eṉṟalum,
   viṭṭa piṟappilyāṉ virumpiya kātalaṉ
   tiṭṭi viṭamuṇac celuyir pōvuḻi         11-100
   uyiroṭu vēvēṉ uṇarvu oḻi kālattu
   veyilviḷaṅku amayattu viḷaṅkit tōṉṟiya
   cātu cakkaraṉ taṉaiyāṉ ūṭṭiya
   kālam pōlvatuōr kaṉāmayakku uṟṟēṉ
   āṅkuataṉ payaṉē āruyir maruntāy
   īṅkuip pāttiram eṉkaip pukuntatu
   nāvaloṭu peyariya māperun tīvattu
   vitti nalaṟam viḷainta ataṉpayaṉ
   tuyppōr tammaṉait tuṇiccitar uṭuttu
   vayiṟukāy perumpaci alaittaṟku iraṅki         11-110
   veyileṉa muṉiyātu puyaleṉa maṭiyātu
   puṟaṅkaṭai niṉṟu puṉkaṇ kūrntumuṉ
   aṟaṅkaṭai nillātu ayarvōr palarāl
   īṉṟa kuḻavi mukaṅkaṇṭu iraṅkit
   tīmpāl curappōḷ taṉmulai pōṉṟē
   neñcu vaḻippaṭūum viñcaip pāttirattu
   akaṉcuraip peyta āruyir maruntuavar
   mukamkaṇṭu curattal kāṇṭalvēṭ kaiyēṉeṉa,
   maṟantēṉ ataṉtiṟam nīeṭuttu uraittaṉai
   aṟamkari yāka aruḷcurantu ūṭṭum         11-120
   ciṟantōrkku allatu cevvaṉam curavātu
   āṅṅaṉam āyiṉai ataṉpayaṉ aṟintaṉai
   īṅkuniṉṟu eḻuvāy eṉṟuavaḷ uraippa,
   tīva tilakai taṉaṭi vaṇaṅki
   māperum pāttiram malarkkaiyil ēntik
   kōmakaṉ pīṭikai toḻutu valamkoṇṭu
   vāṉūṭu eḻuntu maṇimē kalaitāṉ
   vaḻuaṟu teyvam vāymaiyiṉ uraitta
   eḻunāḷ vantatu eṉmakaḷ vārāḷ
   vaḻuvāy uṇṭueṉa mayaṅkuvōḷ muṉṉar         11-130
   vantu tōṉṟi,
   antil avarkkuōr aṟputam kūṟum
   iravi vaṉmaṉ oruperu makaḷē
   turakat tāṉait tuccayaṉ tēvi
   amuta pativayiṟṟu aritil tōṉṟit
   tavvaiyar ākiya tāraiyum vīraiyum
   avvaiyar āyiṉīr nummaṭi toḻutēṉ
   vāyva tāka māṉiṭa yākkaiyil
   tīviṉai aṟukkum ceytavam numakkuīṅku
   aṟavaṇa vaṭikaḷ tampāl peṟumiṉ         11-140
   ceṟitoṭi nallīr umpiṟappu īṅkuiḵtu
   āput tiraṉkai amuta curapieṉum
   māperum pāttiram nīyirum toḻumeṉat
   toḻutaṉar ēttiya tūmoḻi yāroṭum
   paḻutuaṟu mātavaṉ pātam paṭarkēm
   eḻukeṉa eḻuntaṉaḷ iḷaṅkoṭi tāṉeṉ.
   pāttiram peṟṟa kātai muṟṟiṟṟu.
   ----------

   Chapter 11. Manimekalai receives the Amudhasurabhi. The story of young
                                 Āputhiran

   Deepathilahai and Manimekalai
   The goddess Manimekalai left Manimekalai
   on the island of Manipallavam and flew away.
   Manimekalai walked one kāvadam distance
   wandering about and looking around the white sand dunes,
   flowering groves and ponds blooming with flowers.
   Manimekalai meets the goddess Deepathilahai
   When Manimekalai was wandering about,
   Deepathilahai, a goddess, appeared before her and asked,
   “Did you come on a ship and escape when it sank in the ocean here?
   You are beautiful like a golden vine—
   who are you?”
   Manimekalai answered,
   “You, shining like a golden vine, ask me who I am.
   Do you wish to know who I am in this birth
   or who I was in my previous birth?
   Listen to me carefully.
   I was married to Rāgulan in my last birth and my name was Lakshmi.
   In this birth I was born a daughter to Mādhavi,
   a dancer, and my name is Manimekalai.
   The goddess Manimekalai has the same name as I,
   and she brought me to this island.
   The great Buddha Peedihai on this island told me of my previous birth.
   This is how I came here
   and came to know the truth of my last birth.
   You are charming as a blossoming vine.
   Who are you?”
   Deepathilahai, adorned with ornaments,
   knew of Manimekalai’s previous birth.
   She told her why she had come to the island.
   She said, “There is an island called Rattinatheevu next to this island.
   On the top of the high mountain there called Samandam,
   there is a footprint of the Buddha, the lord of Dharma.
   His feet are a boat that saves people from the ocean of birth.
   I went there, circled it, worshiped it and came here.
   I protect this faultless shining Peedihai
   because Indra, the king of the gods, put it here
   and ordered me to take care of it.
   My name is Deepathilahai.
   Manimekalai receives the Amudhasurabhi that was placed in Gomuki pond
   by Āputhiran
   O Manimekalai, listen.
   Only those who follow the auspicious dharma of Buddha,
   the king of dharma, can see this Peedihai.
   If they worship it folding their hands
   they will come to know their past births.
   All the people of the earth cannot be as fortunate as they—
   only they will know what dharma is,
   and you are like one of those sages.
   O you adorned with beautiful ornaments, listen.
   In front of this famous divine Peedihai,
   there is a pond called Gomuki,
   filled with pure flourishing water and beautiful kuvalai
   and neythal flowers that bloom in the spring. 11-040
   Then, during the bull asterism,
   on the fourteenth of the twenty-seven stars,
   the Amudhasurabhi, a pot that is always filled with food
   and never becomes empty, will appear
   on the birthday of the lord Buddha.
   This Amudhasurabhi is the wonderful pot that was kept by Āputhiran.
   He would feed hungry people with it.
   Once the god Indra became angry at Āputhiran
   and made the rain pour so the land flourished.
   Āputhiran could not find anyone to feed
   and so decided to perform tapas.
   At that time he put the Amudhasurabhi in the water of Gomuki pond,
   prayed and said that the pot should appear from the pond
   on every full moon day in the month of Vaikāsi under the star of Visāka
   on the same day the lord Buddha was born.
   You, beautiful as a young vine, hear me.
   This very day is the full moon day in the month of Vaikāsi,
   when the divine Amudhasurabhi will appear in this pond,
   O you adorned with faultless jewels,
   it appears that the pot will come into your hands.
   The food that comes from that pot
   is a wonderful remedy for all hungry people.
   The people can fill their hands with its food
   and it will never grow less.
   O you with hair adorned with fragrant flowers,
   you will know all about Amudhasurabhi from
   the sage Aravanar at the place where you live.”
   Deepathilahai told all these things to Manimekalai.
   After hearing Deepathilahai,
   Manimekalai went around the divine Buddha Peedihai
   and worshiped the Buddha.
   Then she and Deepathilahai circled the Gomuki pond
   and stood worshiping it .
   Manimekalai stood there, lovely as an young vine,
   and the pot Amudhasurabhi that has been so venerated
   came to the hands of innocent Manimekalai
   adorned with precious bracelets.
   Manimekalai was pleased and worshiped the Buddha Peedihai. She praised
   the Buddha, saying,
   “You, the heroic one, conquered Kama.
   You remove the cruel enmity
   of evil conduct, and I worship your feet.
   O divine one, you teach dharma to all,I worship your feet.
   You are the ancient one,
   and do not desire moksha, I worship your feet.
   You do not have eight future births like others, I worship your feet.
   You are the eyes that give sight to all, I worship your feet.
   You do not listen to evil words, I worship your feet.
   Your words are excellent, I worship your feet.
   You remove the sorrows of people on the earth, I worship you.
   My tongue knows only to praise and worship you.”11-070
   Deepathilahai also worshiped the feet of the lord Buddha
   staying under the shadow of a bodhi tree
   and praying to the Buddha to remove the troubles of all. 11-070
   Deepathilahai told Manimekalai, adorned with precious ornaments,
   “Hunger is an evil sickness and will destroy a good family,
   kill excellence and destroy the knowledge
   that is a person’s boat to cross over births.
   It takes away the jewel that is self-respect,
   destroys beauty, and makes a person beg on the street
   with their lovely women with ornamented breasts.
   Hunger is a sickness and an evil.
   My tongue does not have the ability
   to praise the fame of the person
   who takes away the hunger of people.
   Deepathilahai tells the story of hungry people and the sage Viswāmitra.
   Once when there was no rain in the world,
   all trees and green things withered in the hot sun
   and all creatures died without food and water.
   Viswāmitra, learned in the Vedas,
   renounced his kingship and became a sage.
   Once he was wandering in his country to see what was happening
   and saw that everywhere there was hunger and famine.
   He wanted to make the land flourish and remove hunger.
   Because there was no food for him to eat,
   he began to eat even the food that was given to dogs.
   He prayed to Indra, the generous one,
   and asked him to make the rain come.
   Indra, the king of the gods, came to him and made it rain,
   so that crops grew abundantly, the land continually flourished and the
   people survived.
   Living by giving food to hungry people, doing charity,
   and removing the hunger of the poor who cannot find food,
   is the way to live a true life on the earth.
   Giving food is giving life.
   You have the gift of giving life to all
   and know the matchless dharma
   that is to remove hunger.”
   Manimekalai tells her previous birth to Deepathilahai
   After hearing Deepathilahai,
   Manimekalai told her about her previous birth.
   She said, “In my last birth a snake bit my husband
   and I was going to enter the fire.
   At that time just as I was losing sensation,
   I saw a dream in which I fed the sage Sādhuchakkaran.
   That offering of food to the sage
   is the reason this Amudhasurabhi came to my hand.
   It will remedy hunger and give life to people.
   On this great earth, rich people live enjoying their wealth
   because of their good karma in their last birth.
   But there are many born poor and because of their bad karma
   they go to the houses of the rich and beg for food.
   They wear torn clothes and their stomachs are shrunken from hunger.
   They are so hungry that even in the heat and rain
   they wander about, go to the houses of the rich, stand before them
   and sorrowfully and tirelessly beg for food.
   This divine pot gives food like the breasts of a mother
   that give milk when she sees the withered faces of her children.
   The food that comes from this
   is the wonderful remedy for people’s hunger.
   I want to see the happy faces of people when they receive food.”
   When Manimekalai described the power of the Amudhasurabhi,
   Deepathilahai said, “I had forgotten the power of this Amudhasurabhi,
   and you have reminded me of it. 11-120
   The clouds become dark to pour rain
   because of the compassionate people who follow dharma.
   You know all the wonderful deeds that this pot will do.
   Now you may return to where you live.”
   Manimekalai bowed to the feet of Deepathihilagai
   and carried the divine pot in her lotus hands.
   She went around the Buddha Peedihai, worshiped it
   and then flew through the sky using her mantra and went to her place.
   Manimekalai arrives at her home and sees Mādhavi and Sudhamathi.
   Mādhavi was worried about her daughter.
   She said, “The faultless goddess told me
   that my daughter Manimekalai would come in seven days.
   The seventh day has arrived but my daughter has not come.
   Is something wrong?"
   That evening, Manimekalai appeared before Mādhavi,
   relieving her worry and concern.
   She said, “In your previous birth
   you were the daughter of Ravivarman,
   and were married to Thuchayan, the king,
   master of an army of horses.
   Your mother was Amudapathi
   and your sisters were Thārai and Veerai.
   Thārai was born as my mother
   and Veerai was born as Sudhamathi.
   May you have good fortune that will remove
   your bad karma in this human birth,
   O you adorned with beautiful bracelets!
   Go to the monk Aravanar and ask him about your births.
   This is the wonderful pot, the Amudhasurabhi,
   that came to me from the hands of Āputhran. Worship it.”
   Mādhavi and Sudhamathi worshiped the Amudhasurabhi and praised it.
   Manimekalai said, “Let us go to worship the feet
   of the faultless monk Aravanar.”
   They rose and went to see Aravanar. 11-146
   ------------
                        ____________________________

                      12. aṟavaṇart toḻuta kātai
[ maṇimēkalai pāttiram koṇṭu taṉṉūr aṟavaṇart toḻuta pāṭṭu ]

   āṅkuavar tammuṭaṉ aṟavaṇa aṭikaḷ
   yāṅkuuḷar eṉṟē iḷaṅkoṭi viṉāay
   naraimutir yākkai naṭuṅkā nāviṉ
   uraimū tāḷaṉ uṟaiviṭam kuṟuki
   maimmalark kuḻali mātavaṉ tiruntaṭi
   mummuṟai vaṇaṅki muṟaiyuḷi ētti,
   putumalarc cōlai poruntiya vaṇṇamum,
   utaya kumaraṉāṅku uṟṟuurai ceytatum,
   maṇimē kalāteyvam maṇipal lavattiṭai
   aṇiyiḻai taṉṉai akaṟṟiya vaṇṇamum,         12-10
   āṅkuat tīvakattu aṟavōṉ ācaṉam
   nīṅkiya piṟappu nēriḻaikku aḷittatum,
   aḷitta piṟappiṉ ākiya kaṇavaṉaik
   kaḷikkayal neṭuṅkaṇ kaṭavuḷiṉ peṟṟatum,
   tavvaiyar ākiya tāraiyum vīraiyum
   vevviṉai uruppa viḷintukēṭu eyti
   mātavi ākiyum cutamati ākiyum
   kōtaiam cāyal niṉṉoṭum kūṭiṉar
   āṅkuavar tamtiṟam aṟavaṇaṉ taṉpāl
   pūṅkoṭi nallāy kēḷeṉṟu uraittatum,         12-20
   uraitta pūṅkoṭi orumūṉṟu mantiram
   taṉakkuurai ceytutāṉ ēkiya vaṇṇamum,
   teyvam pōyapiṉ tīva tilakaiyum
   aiyeṉat tōṉṟi aruḷoṭum aṭaintatum,
   aṭainta teyvam āput tiraṉkai
   vaṇaṅkuuṟu pāttiram vāymaiyiṉ aḷittatum,
   āput tiraṉtiṟam aṟavaṇaṉ taṉpāl
   kēḷeṉṟu uraittuk kiḷaroḷi māteyvam
   pōkeṉa maṭantai pōnta vaṇṇamum
   mātavaṉ taṉṉai vaṇaṅkiṉaḷ uraittalum,         12-30
   maṇimē kalaiurai mātavaṉ kēṭṭut
   taṇiyā iṉpam talaittalai mēlvarap
   poṉtoṭi mātar naltiṟam ciṟakka
   uṟṟuuṇar vāynī ivartiṟam uraikkēṉ:
   niṉneṭun teyvam niṉakkueṭuttu uraitta
   annāḷ aṉṟiyum aruviṉai kaḻūum
   āti mutalvaṉ aṭiiṇai ākiya
   pātapaṅ kayamalai paravic celvēṉ
   kaccayam āḷum kaḻalkāl vēntaṉ
   māperun tāṉai maṉṉa niṉṉoṭum         12-40
   tēviyar tamakkum tītuiṉ ṟōeṉa
   aḻitakavu uḷḷamoṭu araṟṟiṉaṉ āki
   oḷiiḻai mātarkku uṟṟatai uraippōṉ
   putukkōḷ yāṉaimuṉ pōṟṟātu ceṉṟu
   matukkaḷi mayakkattu vīrai māyntatūum
   āṅkuatu kēṭṭuōr aramiyam ēṟit
   tāṅkātu vīḻntu tāraicā vuṟṟatūum
   kaḻiperun tuṉpam kāvalaṉ uraippa
   paḻaviṉaip payaṉnī pariyaleṉṟu eḻuntēṉ         12-50
   āṭuṅ kūttiyar aṇiyē pōla
   vēṟṟōr aṇiyoṭu vantī rōeṉa
   maṇimē kalaimuṉ maṭakkoṭi yārtiṟam
   tuṇiporuḷ mātavaṉ colliyum amaiyāṉ,
   piṟaviyum aṟaviyum peṟṟiyiṉ uṇarnta
   naṟumalark kōtāy nalkiṉai kēḷāy:
   taruma talaivaṉ talaimaiyiṉ uraitta
   perumaicāl nalaṟam perukā tāki
   iṟutiil nalkati cellum peruvaḻi
   aṟukaiyum neruñciyum aṭarntukaṇ aṭaittāṅkuc         12-60
   ceyirvaḻaṅku tīkkati tiṟantu kaleṉṟu
   uyirvaḻaṅku peruneṟi orutiṟam paṭṭatu
   taṇpaṉi viḻuṅkiya ceṅkatir maṇṭilam
   uṇṭueṉa uṇartal allatu yāvatum
   kaṇṭuiṉitu viḷaṅkāk kāṭci pōṉṟatu
   calākai nuḻainta maṇittuḷai akavaiyiṉ
   ulānīrp peruṅkaṭal ōṭā tāyiṉum
   āṅkuat tuḷaivaḻi ukunīr pōla
   īṅku nalaṟam eytalum uṇṭueṉac
   collalum uṇṭuyāṉ collutal tēṟṟār         12-70
   mallalmā ñālattu makkaḷē ātaliṉ
   cakkara vāḷattut tēvar ellām
   tokkuoruṅku īṇṭit tuṭitalō kattu
   mikkōṉ pātam viḻuntaṉar irappa
   iruḷparantu kiṭanta malartalai ulakattu
   virikatirc celvaṉ tōṉṟiṉaṉ eṉṉa
   īreṇ ṇūṟṟōṭu īreṭṭu āṇṭil
   pēraṟi vāḷaṉ tōṉṟumataṉ piṟpāṭu
   peruṅkuḷa maruṅkil curuṅkaic ciṟuvaḻi
   irumperu nīttam pukuvatu pōla         12-80
   aḷavāc ciṟucevi aḷappuaru nalaṟam
   uḷammali uvakaiyōṭu uyirkoḷap pukūum
   katirōṉ tōṉṟuṅ kālai āṅkuavaṉ
   aviroḷi kāṭṭum maṇiyē pōṉṟu
   maittuiruḷ kūrnta maṉamācu tīrap
   putta ñāyiṟu tōṉṟuṅ kālait
   tiṅkaḷum ñāyiṟum tīṅkuuṟā viḷaṅkat
   taṅkā nāṇmīṉ takaimaiyiṉ naṭakkum
   vāṉam poyyātu mānilam vaḷampaṭum
   ūṉuṭai uyirkaḷ uṟutuyar kāṇā         12-90
   vaḷivalam koṭkum mātiram vaḷampaṭum
   naḷiiru munnīr nalampala tarūum
   kaṟavaikaṉṟu ārttik kalaniṟai poḻiyum
   paṟavai payaṉtuyttu uṟaipati nīṅkā
   vilaṅkum makkaḷum verūuppakai nīṅkum
   kalaṅkuañar narakarum pēyum kaiviṭum
   kūṉum kuṟaḷum ūmum ceviṭum
   māvum maruḷum maṉuyir peṟāa
   annāḷ piṟantavaṉ aruḷaṟam kēṭṭōr
   iṉṉāp piṟavi ikantōr ātaliṉ         12-100
   pōti mūlam poruntiya ciṟappiṉ
   nātaṉ pāta navaikeṭa ēttutal
   piṟavi tōṟum maṟavēṉ; maṭakkoṭi
   mātar niṉṉāl varuvaṉa ivvūr
   ētu nikaḻcci yāvum palauḷa
   āṅkuavai nikaḻnta piṉṉar allatu
   pūṅkoṭi mātar poruḷurai poruntāy
   āti mutalvaṉ aruntuyar keṭukkum
   pātapaṅ kayamalai paraciṉar ātaliṉ
   īṅkuivar iruvarum iḷaṅkoṭi niṉṉōṭu         12-110
   ōṅkuuyar pōti uravōṉ tiruntaṭi
   toḻutuvalam koṇṭu toṭarviṉai nīṅkip
   paḻutuil naṉṉeṟip paṭarkuvar kāṇāy
   āruyir maruntām amuta curapieṉum
   māperum pāttiram maṭakkoṭi peṟṟaṉai
   makkaḷ tēvar eṉaviru cārkkum
   otta muṭiviṉ ōraṟam uraikkēṉ
   pacippiṇi tīrttal eṉṟē avarum
   tavapperu nallaṟam cāṟṟiṉar,-ātaliṉ
   maṭuttatīk koḷiya maṉuyirp pacikeṭa         12-120
   eṭuttaṉaḷ pāttiram iḷaṅkoṭi tāṉeṉ.
   aṟavaṇart toḻuta kātai muṟṟiṟṟu.
   -----------

                    Chapter 12. Aravanar and Manimekalai

   Manimekalai, lovely as a vine,
   accompanied by Sudhamathi and her mother,
   searched for Aravanar Adigal’s place and went to see him.
   He was old, his hair was white,
   and his tongue trembled when he spoke.
   Manimekalai, her dark hair adorned with flowers, went near him,
   worshiped his faultless feet three times and praised him.
   Manimekalai describes to Aravanar what happened to her in the garden
   and on the island of Manipallavam
   Manimekalai said, “When I went to the blooming garden to pick flowers,
   the prince Udayakumaran came, saw me and spoke to me.
   Then the goddess Manimekalai took me to the island of Manipallavam,
   12-010
   where I saw the Buddha Peedihai with the footstep of the Buddha,
   the god of dharma on the island.
   The Peedihai told me about my previous birth
   and how the goddess with fish eyes said in Manipallavam
   that my husband from the last birth
   is prince Udayakumaran in this birth.
   The goddess told me that Thārai and Veerai
   were my sisters in my previous birth
   and in the present birth they have been born
   as my mother Mādhavi and Sudhamathi. 12 -020
   The goddess Manimekalai told me
   to go to Aravanar Adigal and listen to his words of dharma,
   and after that the goddess left me on the island of Manipallavam
   after teaching me the following three mantras—
   to disguise myself in whatever form I wish,
   to fly and wander in the sky,
   and not to become hungry when I have no food.
   The goddess Deepathilahai appeared before me suddenly
   and told me about the Amudhadurabhi
   left by the young Āputhiran in Gomuki pond
   to appear on a full moon day
   and be received into the hands of someone who feeds hungry people.
   The goddess said that very day was the full moon day
   when the pot would appear in the Gomuki pond.
   Deepathilahai and I went to Gomuki pond on that full moon day
   and the pot rose from the pond and came into my hands.
   Deepathilagai knows the story of the Amudhasurabhi
   and asked me to go to you, sage Aravanar,
   to know about the young Āputhiran.
   Then Deepathilahai told me to go to her home and left.”
   Manimekalai told these things to Aravanar and bowed to him. 12-030
   He was pleased to hear the story of Manimekalai
   and said, “O you adorned with golden bangles,
   may you live happily! Listen carefully
   and I will tell you what happened to you in your previous birth.”
   Aravanar tells Manimekalai the story of the previous births of
   Manimekalai, Sudhamathi and Mādhavi.
   Aravanar said, “Once, I went to the mountain
   where there is the lotus footprint of the ancient god Buddha.
   There in a flourishing garden
   I saw Thuchayan, the ankleted king of the Kachayam country, 12 -040
   I asked him, ‘O king with a large army,
   are you and your wives well?’
   He was not happy and sadly told me
   what had happened to his wives adorned with shining ornaments.
   He said that his wife Veerai drank, grew intoxicated
   and went in front of an elephant and was killed.
   Her sister Thārai, hearing that and unable to bear her grief,
   climbed to the top of a building, fell and died.
   I told the king
   that these things had happened because of his wives’ karma,
   and that he should not be sad.” 12-050
   After telling the story, Aravanar asked Manimekalai,
   “Why do you, dancing women, come today wearing other clothes?
   Aravanar tells Manimekalai, Sudamathi and Mādhavi truths about birth
   “You with hair adorned with fragrant flowers,
   you know your births and virtue.
   The births of uncharitable people
   are like a path filled with grass and thorns—
   a rough way blocked by stones. 12-060
   Life is like this: one sees there is a red sun in the sky
   and sees that cool dew has disappeared
   while not realizing that the two things are connected.
   An ocean cannot enter a small hole that a needle can enter
   but a small current of water can flow through it.
   People say just like that, one person can get good karma
   even though he has not done many good deeds.
   Even if I say these things about life people will not understand.
   12-070
   Once, all the gods in the Chakravālakkottam
   gathered together, went and worshiped
   the feet of the god of Thuditha Loka
   and asked him to help them.
   Aravanar tells how the god of Thuditha Loka foretold the coming of the
   Buddha
   He told them,
   ‘Just as the bright sun rises in this dark world,
   a very wise one will appear in the year of 2116.
   After that, as if the flood of a large pond
   were to flow through a small hole,
   dharma will joyfully penetrate the small ears of the people. 12-080
   At that time the Buddha will appear
   like the bright shining sun that spreads diamond light
   and remove all the faults in the hearts of the people.
   When the sun that is the Buddha appears,
   the sun and moon will appear auspiciously.
   All the stars will shine
   and all the planets will cease their wandering.
   The rain will fall on time and the earth will flourish.
   The creatures of the world
   will no longer be hungry and suffer. 12-090
   The wind will blow softly
   and all the directions will be bright.
   The great oceans will produce pearls
   and other good things.
   Cows will give milk to fill pots
   and their calves drink it and be happy.
   Birds will find good food wherever they are
   without flying far from their nests.
   All animals and people will live without any enemies.
   Naragars and peys will not frighten anyone.
   Hunchbacks, short people, dumb people
   and animals will not be born and suffer.
   The people born when the Buddha
   appears will hear his dharma and grace 12-100
   and have no bad births on this earth.’
   Aravanar advises Manimekalai.
   O you, lovely as a vine,
   may I not forget in all my births
   to worship the feet of the lord
   seated under the bodhi tree.
   Many events will happen because of you in this place,
   but after those events occur you will not speak of dharma.
   Listen to my words.
   These two women with you
   worshiped the footsteps of the ancient lord
   on the Pāda Pangaya mountain
   that remove the troubles of all.
   They will go around the faultless footsteps
   of the lord who stays beneath the bodhi tree with you
   and their previous karma will be removed
   and they will follow the faultless path.
   You, lovely as a vine, 12-110
   have received the Amudhasurabhi, the wonderful pot
   that is a life-giving medicine.
   I will tell you a dharma that will help both people and the gods,
   and that is to remove hunger.”
   After Aravanar told them of this best of dharmas,
   Manimekalai, beautiful as a young vine,
   took the Amudhasurabhi in her hand. 12-121.
   ----------
                        ____________________________

                 13. āputtiraṉ tiṟam aṟivitta kātai
[ maṇimēkalaikku aṟavaṇar āputtiraṉ tiṟam kūṟiya pāṭṭu ]

   māperum pāttiram maṭakkoṭikku aruḷiya
   āput tiraṉtiṟam aṇiyiḻai kēḷāy:
   vāra ṇāciōr maṟaiōm pāḷaṉ
   āraṇa uvātti apañcikaṉ eṉpōṉ
   pārppaṉi cāli kāppukkaṭai kaḻintu
   koṇṭōṉ piḻaitta taṇṭam añcit
   teṉticaik kumari āṭiya varuvōḷ
   cūlmutir paruvattut tuñcuiruḷ iyaviṭai
   īṉṟa kuḻavikku iraṅkāḷ ākit
   tōṉṟāt tuṭavaiyiṉ iṭṭaṉaḷ nīṅka,         13-10
   tāyil tūvāk kuḻavittuyar kēṭṭuōr
   āvantu aṇaintuāṅku ataṉtuyar tīra
   nāvāl nakki naṉpāl ūṭṭip
   pōkātu eḻunāḷ puṟamkāttu ōmpa,
   vayaṉaṅ kōṭṭilōr maṟaiōm pāḷaṉ
   iyaviṭai varuvōṉ iḷampūti eṉpōṉ
   kuḻavi ēṅkiya kūkkural kēṭṭuk
   kaḻumiya tuṉpamoṭu kaṇṇīr ukuttuāṅku
   āmakaṉ allaṉ eṉmakaṉ eṉṟē
   kātali taṉṉoṭu kaitoḻutu eṭuttu        13-20
   nampi piṟantāṉ polikanam kiḷaieṉat
   tampatip peyarntu tamaroṭum kūṭi
   mārpuiṭai munnūl vaḷaiyā muṉṉar
   nāiṭai naṉṉūl naṉkaṉam naviṟṟi
   ōttuuṭai antaṇarkku oppavai ellām
   nāttolaivu iṉṟi naṉkaṉam aṟintapiṉ,
   appati taṉṉuḷōr antaṇaṉ maṉaivayiṉ
   pukkōṉ āṅkup pulaicūḻ vēḷviyil
   kurūuttoṭai mālai kōṭṭiṭaic cuṟṟi
   verūuppakai añci veytuyirttup pulampik         13-30
   kolainavil vēṭṭuvar koṭumaram añci
   valaiyiṭaip paṭṭa māṉē pōṉṟuāṅku
   añciniṉṟu aḻaikkum āttuyar kaṇṭu
   neñcunaṭukku uṟṟu neṭuṅkaṇīr ukuttuk
   kaḷḷa viṉaiyil kaṭuntuyar pāḻpaṭa
   naḷiruḷ koṇṭu naṭakkuvaṉ eṉṉum
   uḷḷam karantuāṅku orupuṭai otuṅki
   aliṭai ākkoṇṭu appati akaṉṟōṉ
   kalatar attaṅ kaṭavā niṉṟuḻi
   kaṭattiṭai āvoṭu kaiyakap paṭutti         13-40
   ākoṇṭu inta āriṭaik kaḻiya
   nīmakaṉ allāy nikaḻntatai uraiyāy
   pulaicciṟu makaṉē pōkkap paṭutieṉṟu
   alaikkōl ataṉāl aṟaintaṉar kēṭpa,
   āṭṭiniṉṟu alaikkum antaṇar uvāttiyaik
   kōṭṭiṉil kuttik kuṭarpuyt tuṟuttuk
   kāṭṭiṭai nalāk kataḻntu kiḷarntuōṭa,
   āput tiraṉtāṉ āṅkuavarkku uraippōṉ
   nōvaṉa ceyyaṉmiṉ noṭivaṉa kēṇmiṉ;         13-50
   viṭunila maruṅkiṉ paṭupul ārntu
   neṭunila maruṅkiṉ makkaṭku ellām
   piṟantanāḷ toṭṭum ciṟantataṉ tīmpāl
   aṟamtarum neñcōṭu aruḷcurantu ūṭṭum
   itaṉoṭu vanta ceṟṟam eṉṉai
   mutumaṟai antaṇir muṉṉiyatu uraimō
   poṉaṇi nēmi valaṅkoḷcak karakkai
   maṉuyir mutalvaṉ makaṉemakku aruḷiya
   arumaṟai naṉṉūl aṟiyātu ikaḻntaṉai
   terumaral uḷḷattuc ciṟiyai nīav         13-60
   āmakaṉ ātaṟku ottaṉai aṟiyāy
   nīmakaṉ allāy kēḷeṉa ikaḻtalum,
   āṉmakaṉ acalaṉ māṉmakaṉ ciruṅki
   pulimakaṉ viriñci puraiyōr pōṟṟum
   narimakaṉ allaṉō kēca kampaḷaṉ
   īṅkuivar nuṅkulattu iruṭi kaṇaṅkaḷeṉṟu
   ōṅkuuyar peruñciṟappu uraittalum uṇṭāl
   āvoṭu vanta aḻikulam uṇṭō
   nāṉmaṟai mākkāḷ naṉṉūl akattueṉa,
   āṅkuavar tammuḷōr antaṇaṉ uraikkum         13-70
   īṅkuivaṉ taṉpiṟappu yāṉaṟi kuvaṉeṉa
   naṭavai varuttamoṭu nalkūr mēṉiyaḷ
   vaṭamoḻi yāṭṭi maṟaimuṟai eytik
   kumari pātam koḷkaiyiṉ vaṇaṅkit
   tamaril tīrnta cālieṉ pōḷtaṉai
   yātu niṉūr īṅkueṉ varavueṉa
   māmaṟai yāṭṭi varutiṟam uraikkum
   vāra ṇāciōr māmaṟai mutalvaṉ
   āraṇa uvātti arumpeṟal maṉaiviyāṉ
   pārppārkku ovvāp paṇpiṉ oḻukik         13-80
   kāppuk kaṭaikaḻintu kaṇavaṉai ikaḻntēṉ
   elpayam uṭaimaiyiṉ iriyal mākkaḷoṭu
   teṟkaṇ kumari āṭiya varuvēṉ
   poṉtērc ceḻiyaṉ koṟkaiyam pērurk
   kātavam kaṭantu kōvalar irukkaiyiṉ
   īṉṟa kuḻavikku iraṅkēṉ ākit
   tōṉṟāt tuṭavaiyiṉ iṭṭaṉaṉ pōntēṉ
   celkati uṇṭō tīviṉai yēṟkueṉṟu
   allaluṟṟu aḻuta avaḷmakaṉ īṅkuivaṉ
   collutal tēṟṟēṉ coṟpayam iṉmaiyiṉ         13-90
   pullalōm paṉmiṉ pulaimakaṉ ivaṉeṉa.
   āput tiraṉpiṉ amarnakai ceytu
   māmaṟai mākkaḷ varuṅkulam kēṇmō
   mutumaṟai mutalvaṉ muṉṉart tōṉṟiya
   kaṭavuḷ kaṇikai kātalañ ciṟuvar
   arumaṟai mutalvar antaṇar iruvarum
   purinūl mārpīr poyurai yāmō
   cālik kuṇṭō tavaṟueṉa uraittu
   nāṉmaṟai mākkaḷai nakuvaṉ niṟpa,
   ōtal antaṇarkku ovvāṉ eṉṟē         13-100
   tātai pūtiyum taṉmaṉai kaṭitara
   ā kavar kaḷvaṉeṉṟu antaṇar uṟaitarum
   kirāmam eṅkaṇum kaṭiñaiyil kaliṭa
   mikka celvattu viḷaṅkiyōr vāḻum
   takkaṇa maturai tāṉceṉṟu eytic,
   cintā viḷakkiṉ ceḻuṅkalai niyamattu
   antil muṉṟil ampalap pīṭikait
   taṅkiṉaṉ vatintuat takkaṇap pērūr
   aiyak kaṭiñai kaiyiṉ ēnti
   maiyaṟu ciṟappiṉ maṉaitoṟum maṟukik         13-110
   kāṇār kēḷār kālmuṭap paṭṭōr
   pēṇunar illōr piṇinaṭukkuṟṟōr
   yāvarum varukaeṉṟu icaittuuṭaṉ ūṭṭi
   uṇṭuoḻi micciluṇṭu ōṭutalai maṭuttuk
   kaṇpaṭai koḷḷum kāvalaṉ tāṉeṉ.         13-115
   āputtiraṉ tiṟaṉ aṟivitta kātai muṟṟiṟṟu.
   -----------

                  Chapter 13. The story of young Āputhiran

   Aravanar tells the story of young Āputhiran
   “O Manimekalai adorned with beautiful ornaments,
   listen, and I will tell you the story of the young Āputhiran
   who gave you the divine Amudhasurabhi.
   In Varanasi, an Arana Uvāttihi Brahmin named Abanjigan,
   lived reciting the Vedas and performing fire sacrifices.
   His wife Sali was unfaithful to him.
   Afraid of staying in the village,
   she left her place and went south
   to Kanyākumari and bathed in the ocean.
   In the middle of the night she gave birth to a baby boy
   but was afraid to stay there
   because it was a Brahmin village.
   She was worried about the baby
   and left him in a grove and went away. 13-010
   A cow heard the crying of the baby,
   came near it, licked it lovingly and fed it sweet milk.
   It stayed with the baby for seven days and protected it.
   In the village of Vayangodu there lived
   a Brahmin proficient in the Vedas.
   He heard the baby crying, went near it and saw it.
   He felt compassion, shed tears
   and realized it was not the son of the cow.
   Saying, ‘This is my son!’
   he took the baby to his home and gave it to his wife.
   He and his wife thanked the gods and exclaimed,
   ‘A son is born to us—may our family flourish!’
   The father taught the boy all the shastras.
   He invited his friends
   and performed the thread ceremony for the boy on his birthday. 13-020
   He taught his son all the things
   that a boy needs to know as a Brahmin.
   The boy learned all that his father taught him,
   remembering everything without mistakes.
   One day the boy went to another Brahmin’s home
   and saw an animal sacrifice about to take place.
   A trembling cow was tied up
   with a colorful garland on its horns,
   looking like a deer caught in the net of a murderous hunter.
   The cow seemed to be afraid of its enemies, the Brahmins,
   and fearfully and sorrowfully called for help. 13-030
   The boy saw the cow, shivered in his heart, shed tears
   and thought, ‘I will steal this cow
   in the middle of the dark night and take it away.’
   He hid there, took the cow at night and left.
   When he was crossing the forest with the cow,
   some strong, evil Brahmins came
   and caught him with the cow. 13-040.
   They said, ‘You are stealing this cow
   in the middle of the night and running away.
   You are not the good son of a Brahmin.
   You are a son of a pulaiyan and we will outcaste you!’
   Then they hit him with the stick.
   When the cow saw a Brahmin
   was going to hit Āputhiran,
   it went wild, gored the Brahmin in his stomach
   and ran into the forest.
   Āputhiran told the Brahmins, 13 -050
   ‘Do not hurt anyone. Hear what I say.
   From the time it was born
   this cow has fed on grass
   on the free lands given by the king
   and lovingly given sweet milk
   to all the people of the world.
   Why are you angry at this poor cow?
   You know the ancient Vedas.
   Tell me why you think like this?’ 13 -060
   The Brahmins scolded him and said,
   ‘Brahma the creator of the world is the son of Thirumal,
   the ancient lord with a beautiful golden discus in his right hand.
   That lord Brahma gave us these sacred Vedas.
   You do not know their greatness and you disgrace us.
   You are a confused little boy,
   only suitable to be the son of a cow, not a human.
   What you have done is wrong.’ 13 -060
   Āputhiran said,
   ‘Asalan was the son of a cow.
   Srungi was the son of a deer.
   Virinji was the son of a tiger.
   Wasn’t Kesakambalan, praised by sages, the son of a fox?
   You all praise them as rishis in your Brahmin tribes.
   Is there anything in the four Vedas
   saying that someone cannot be part of a cow’s family?’ 13 -070
   The story of Sāli
   One of the Brahmins said, ‘I know about the birth of this boy.
   A woman named Sāli from the north
   left her relatives, and, tired and weak,
   came walking to the ocean in Kanyakumari.
   As she worshiped the feet of the goddess Kanyakumari,
   I saw her and asked, “Where do you come from?
   Why do you come here?”
   She told me her story. 13 -080
   She said, “I am the dear wife of a Brahmin living in Varanasi,
   a scholar of our sacred Vedas.
   I did not follow the good life of Brahmins
   and was unfaithful to my husband.
   I disgraced him and he left me.
   I was afraid that the people of my village would hurt me,
   left the city with wandering pilgrims
   and came south to Kanya Kumari to bathe in the ocean.
   I walked for ten miles
   and reached Korkai, ruled by the Pandya king,
   the rider of a golden chariot.
   I stayed in the houses of cowherds and gave birth to a child.
   Without showing love for the child
   I left the baby in a garden that was not known to anyone
   and went away. I have done a terrible sin—
   will the gods forgive me?”
   She suffered and cried. 13-090
   This boy is the son of that sad woman who suffered and cried.
   I did not want to tell you what I know about this boy
   because everyone thought he is the son of a Brahmin,
   but now you know that he is the son of that woman
   who left her baby and went away.
   Do not protect him—he is a low caste fellow.’ 13-090
   Āputhiran heard that, laughed loudly and said,
   ‘Listen to what I say about families where great Brahmins,
   the scholars of Vedas, are born.
   Isn’t it true that two Brahmin rishis
   were born to Brahma, the creator of the Vedas,
   and Thilothama, a dancer in heaven?
   O Brahmin with your sacred thread,
   was what Sāli did wrong?’
   He laughed at the Brahmins, the scholars of four Vedas,
   and stood there.
   Pudi, Āputhiran’s father,
   thought the boy would not be accepted by the Brahmins
   and was not suitable to recite the Vedas
   and chased him out of his house.
   The whole village of Brahmins scolded Āputhiran, saying,
   ‘You are a thief and you steal cows!’
   and threw stones into his begging pot. 13-100
   Āputhiran left the village
   and went to Madurai where rich people lived.
   He stayed in the beautiful temple of Sindhādevi
   in the mandril near the Peedihai.
   He carried a pot and begged for food from all the good houses. 13-110
   After collecting food he called the blind, deaf, lame,
   orphans and the sick to come and happily fed them,
   eating what was left over
   and sleeping with the begging pot as a pillow,
   He is a protector of people.” 13-115.
   ----------
                        ____________________________

                    14. pāttira marapu kūṟiya kātai
[ maṇimēkalaikku aṟavaṇar amutacurapi eṉṉum pāttiram cintātēvi
         āputtiraṟkuk koṭuttavaṇṇam kūṟiya pāṭṭu ]

   āṅkuavaṟku orunāḷ ampalap pīṭikaip
   pūṅkoṭi nallāy pukuntatu kēḷāy:
   māri naṭunāḷ valiruḷ mayakkattu
   āriṭai uḻantōr ampalam marīit
   tuyilvōṉ taṉṉait toḻutaṉar ētti
   vayiṟukāy perumpaci malaikkum eṉṟalum
   ēṟṟuūṇ allatu vēṟṟūṇ illōṉ
   āṟṟuvatu kāṇāṉ ārañar eyta,
   kēḷitu mātō keṭukaniṉ tītueṉa
   yāvarum ēttum iruṅkalai niyamattut         14-10
   tēvi cintā viḷakkut tōṉṟi
   ēṭā aḻiyal eḻuntuitu koḷḷāy
   nāṭuvaṟaṅ kūriṉumiv ōṭuvaṟam kūrātu
   vāṅkunar kaiyakam varuntutal allatu
   tāṉtolaivu illāt takaimaiyatu eṉṟē
   taṉkaip pāttiram avaṉkaik koṭuttalum
   cintā tēvi ceḻuṅkalai niyamattu
   nantā viḷakkē nāmicaip pāvāy
   vāṉōr talaivi maṇṇōr mutalvi
   ēṉōr uṟṟa iṭarkaḷai vāyeṉat         14-20br>
   tāṉtoḻutu ēttit talaiviyai vaṇaṅki,
   āṅkavar pacitīrttu annāḷ toṭṭu
   vāṅkukai varunta maṉuyir ōmpaliṉ
   makkaḷum māvum maramcēr paṟavaiyum
   tokkuuṭaṉ īṇṭic cūḻntaṉa viṭāa
   paḻumarattu īṇṭiya paṟavaiyiṉ eḻūum
   iḻumeṉ cummai iṭaiiṉṟu olippa,
   īṇṭunīr ñālattu ivaṉceyal intiraṉ
   pāṇṭu kampaḷam tuḷakkiyatu ākaliṉ
   taḷarnta naṭaiyiṉ taṇṭukāl ūṉṟi         14-30
   vaḷainta yākkaiōr maṟaiyōṉ āki
   māiru ñālattu maṉuyir ōmpum
   āruyir mutalvaṉ taṉmuṉ tōṉṟi
   intiraṉ vantēṉ yātuniṉ karuttu
   uṉperun tāṉattu uṟupayaṉ koḷkeṉa
   veḷḷai makaṉpōl vilāiṟa nakkuīṅku
   eḷḷiṉaṉ pōmeṉṟu eṭuttuurai ceyvōṉ
   īṇṭuc ceyviṉai āṇṭunukarn tiruttal
   kāṇtaku ciṟappiṉnum kaṭavuḷar allatu
   aṟamcey mākkaḷ puṟaṅkāttu ōmpunar         14-40
   naltavam ceyvōr paṟṟuaṟa muyalvōr
   yāvarum illāt tēvarnal nāṭṭukku
   iṟaivaṉ ākiya peruviṟal vēntē
   varunti vantōr arumpaci kaḷaintuavar
   tiruntumukam kāṭṭumeṉ teyvak kaṭiñai
   uṇṭi kollō uṭuppaṉa kollō
   peṇṭir kollō pēṇunar kollō
   yāvaiīṅku aḷippaṉa tēvarkōṉ eṉṟalum,
   purappōṉ pāttiram poruntuūṇ curantuīṅku
   irappōrk kāṇātu ēmān tiruppa         14-50
   nirappuiṉṟu eytiya nīḷnilam aṭaṅkalum
   parappu nīrāl palvaḷam curakkeṉa
   āṅkuavaṉ poruṭṭāl āyiram kaṇṇōṉ
   ōṅkuuyar peruñciṟappu ulakōrkku aḷittalum,
   paṉṉī rāṇṭu pāṇṭinal nāṭu
   maṉuyir maṭiya maḻaivaḷam iḻantatu
   vacittoḻil utava mānilam koḻuppap
   pacippuuyir aṟiyāp pāṉmaittu ākaliṉ
   āruyir ōmpunaṉ ampalap pīṭikai
   ūṇoli aravam oṭuṅkiya tāki         14-60
   viṭarum tūrttarum viṭṭēṟ ṟāḷarum
   naṭavai mākkaḷum nakaiyoṭu vaiki
   vaṭṭum cūtum vampak kōṭṭiyum
   muṭṭā vāḻkkai muṟaimaiya tāka,
   āput tiraṉtāṉ ampalam nīṅki
   ūrūr tōṟum uṇpōr viṉāay
   yārivaṉ eṉṟē yāvarum ikaḻntuāṅku
   aruntē mānta āruyir mutalvaṉai
   iruntāy nīyō eṉpār iṉmaiyiṉ
   tiruviṉ celvam peruṅkaṭal koḷḷa         14-70
   orutaṉi varūum perumakaṉ pōlat
   tāṉē tamiyaṉ varuvōṉ taṉmuṉ,
   mānīr vaṅkam vantōr vaṇaṅkic
   cāvaka nalnāṭṭut taṇpeyal maṟuttaliṉ
   ūṉuyir maṭintatu uravōy eṉṟalum,
   amararkōṉ āṇaiyiṉ aruntuvōrp peṟātu
   kumari mūttaeṉ pāttiram ēnti
   aṅkuan nāṭṭup pukuvatueṉ karuttueṉa
   vaṅka mākkaḷoṭu makiḻvuṭaṉ ēṟik
   kālvicai kaṭukak kaṭalkalak kuṟutaliṉ         14-80
   mālitai maṇipal lavattiṭai vīḻttut
   taṅkiyatu orunāḷ tāṉāṅku iḻintaṉaṉ
   iḻintōṉ ēṟiṉaṉ eṉṟuitai eṭuttu
   vaḻaṅkunīr vaṅkam valiruḷ pōtalum,
   vaṅkam pōyapiṉ varuntutuyar eyti
   aṅku vāḻvōr yāvarum iṉmaiyiṉ
   maṉuyir ōmpumim māperum pāttiram
   eṉuyir ōmputal yāṉō poṟēeṉ
   tavamtīr maruṅkil taṉittuyar uḻantēṉ
   cumantueṉ pāttiram eṉṟaṉaṉ toḻutu         14-90
   kōmuki eṉṉum koḻunīr ilañciyiṉ
   ōryāṇṭu orunāḷ tōṉṟueṉa viṭuvōṉ
   aruḷaṟam pūṇṭuāṅku āruyir ōmpunar
   uḷareṉil avarkaip pukuvāy eṉṟuāṅku
   uṇṇā nōṉpōṭu uyirpatip peyarppuḻi,
   annāḷ āṅkuavaṉ taṉpāl ceṉṟē
   eṉuṟ ṟaṉaiyō eṉṟuyāṉ kēṭpat
   taṉuṟ ṟaṉapala tāṉeṭuttu uraittaṉaṉ
   kuṇaticait tōṉṟik kāriruḷ cīttuk
   kuṭaticaic ceṉṟa ñāyiṟu pōla         14-100
   maṇipal lavattiṭai maṉuṭampu iṭṭut
   taṇiyā maṉuyir tāṅkum karuttoṭu
   cāvakam āḷum talaittāḷ vēntaṉ
   āvayiṟṟu utittaṉaṉ āṅkuavaṉ tāṉeṉ.
   pāttira marapu kūṟiya kātai muṟṟiṟṟu.
   -----------

                Chapter 14. Āputhiran and the Amudhasurabhi

   Aravanar tells the story of young Āputhiran and the Amudhasurabhi to
   Manimekalai
   “O you lovely as a blossoming vine, hear what happened then.
   One day in the dark night when it was raining,
   some people came to the temple
   and woke Āputhiran, bowing to him and praising him.
   They said, ‘We are very hungry and suffering.’
   He had no food at hand because he only begged
   and gave away everything he got to the poor.
   Without food to give them he worried how to feed them.
   At that time, the goddess of that beautiful temple,
   Sindhādevi praised by all, appeared before him.
   She said, ‘My son, do not worry. 14-010
   Get up and receive this and your worries will go away.
   Even if the country suffers from famine this pot will not become empty.
   It will fill the hands of the people with so much food
   that their hands hurt.
   This pot will always be full, no matter how much it gives,’
   and she put the pot in Āputhiran’s hands.
   He praised the goddess, ‘Sindhādevi,
   you shine like a lamp always.
   You make all speak, O queen.
   You are on the tongues of all!
   You are the foremost of the gods in the sky,
   and the ancient one of this earth.
   You remove the suffering of all
   when they come to you and ask for help.’14 -020
   He bowed to the goddess and began to feed the people.
   The Amudhasurabhi gave food to the people, filling their hands.
   Animals and all the birds living on the fruit trees
   gathered there for food and made happy sounds.
   Young Āputhiran and Indra the king of the gods.
   The generosity of Āputhiran
   shook the marble throne of Indra, the king of the gods.
   Disguised as an old Brahmin holding a cane, scarcely able to walk,
   with a bent back, Indra appeared in front of Āputhiran,
   the protecter of all the creatures on the earth
   who removed their hunger.
   Indra said to Āputhiran,
   ‘I am Indra and have came to see you.
   What would you like? I will give you any boon
   because of your generosity. Ask.’
   Āputhiran laughed so loud it seemed the bones in his chest would break,
   and said sarcastically, mocking Indra,
   ‘You may go.
   Only the beautiful gods stay in your heaven
   and enjoy the benefit of their good deeds there.
   You are the strong king of heaven,
   and the gods there don’t give charity. 14 -040
   The protectors of people, sages doing hard tapas,
   and people wanting to be without desire
   do not live in your heaven.
   Are there divine pots like the one I have in your world
   that give food to people suffering from hunger?
   Is there anything like this Amudhasurabhi
   to remove their troubles and see their happy faces?
   Are there clothes for the poor people?
   Are there women feeding the poor and protecting them?
   O king of the gods, what could you give me?’14-050
   The thousand-eyed Indra became angry and said,
   ‘May the rain fall abundantly
   and may this land flourish with much wealth.
   You will be disappointed without seeing any beggars,
   unable to feed anyone with your Amudhasurabhi
   that produces so much food!’
   After that the Pandya country flourished for twelve years without
   famine.
   The rains poured and people got so much food
   that they did not know what hunger is. 14-060
   Āputhiran suffers without finding hungry people
   People did not come to the Buddha Peedihai at the temple
   where Āputhiran stayed to feed them.
   There was no sound of people, animals and birds
   coming to eat food there.
   The place was filled with bad people, useless people,
   people without relatives, and street people mocking Āputhiran.
   They gambled, played games and gossiped.
   It became a place for coarse people.
   Āputhiran left the temple, went to many villages
   and asked whether anyone was hungry there.
   People mocked him and said, ‘Who is this person?’
   There was no one to ask him for food
   or even to inquire whether he was still alive. 14-070
   Āputhiran felt like a lonely king
   whose wealth has been taken away by the great ocean.
   At that time, some people came in a ship,
   saw him and approached him.
   They said, ‘O protector of lives,
   in Javaga country there is no rain
   and many people and creatures are dying without food.’
   Āputhiran replied, ‘I cannot find anyone to feed here
   because of the curse of Indra, the king of the gods.
   I want to go with my Amudhasurabhi to the country of Javaga.’
   He happily got on the ship with the people to go. 14-080.
   On the way, there was a storm on the ocean
   and the ship stopped for one day at the island of Manipallavam.
   When it started the next day, the travelers on the ship
   thought Āputhiran had come back to the ship
   and left in the dark night without him.
   When Āputhiran found out the ship had left he was sad.
   He searched for people and creatures
   but he could not find anyone
   and understood that no one lived on that island.
   He thought, ‘This wonderful pot is to save lives.
   I will not keep it just to save my life—that would not be right.
   I have lost the benefit of the tapas
   that let me save the creatures of this earth with this pot.
   What is the use of keeping this pot only for myself?’ 14-090
   Then he went to the pond Gomuki filled with water
   and put the pot into it.
   He said, ‘You should appear from the pond once a year.
   If there is someone kind and generous
   who lives to take care of others and save precious lives,
   you should go into their hands.’
   Then young Āputhiran
   went on a fast to give up his life.
   I saw him, went to him and asked,
   ‘Are you in any trouble?’
   He told me all that had happened
   and, just as the sun that appears in the east,
   takes away the darkness and sets in the west,
   he left his body on the island Manipallavam
   and was born from the womb of the cow
   wishing to save the lives of all creatures of the world.
   He became the king of the country of Javaga.”
   In this way, Aravanar finished telling the story
   of young Āputhiran to Manimekalai. 14-104
   ----------

                 15. pāttiramkoṇṭu piccai pukka kātai
 [ maṇimēkalai pāttiramkoṇṭu piccaikkup perunteruppōya pāṭṭu ]

   iṉṉum kēḷāy iḷaṅkoṭi mātē
   annāḷ avaṉai ōmpiya nalāt
   taṇeṉ cāvakat tavaḷa mālvarai
   maṇmukaṉ eṉṉum māmuṉi iṭavayiṉ
   poṉṉiṉ kōṭṭatu poṉkuḷampu uṭaiyatu
   taṉnalam piṟartoḻat tāṉceṉṟu eyti
   īṉā muṉṉam iṉuyirkku ellām
   tāṉmulai curantu taṉpāl ūṭṭalum
   mūṉṟu kālamum tōṉṟanaṉku uṇarnta
   āṉṟa muṉivaṉ ataṉvayiṟ ṟakattu         15-10
   maḻaivaḷam curappavum maṉuyir ōmpavum
   uyirkā valaṉvantu oruvaṉ tōṉṟum
   kuṭarttoṭar mālai pūṇpāṉ allaṉ
   aṭarppoṉ muṭṭai akavaiyi ṉāṉeṉap,
   piṇinōy iṉṟiyum piṟantuaṟam ceyya
   maṇipal lavattiṭai maṉuyir nīttōṉ
   taṉkāttu aḷitta takaiā ataṉai
   oṟkā uḷḷattu oḻiyāṉ ātaliṉ
   āṅkuav āvayiṟṟu amararkaṇam uvappat
   tīṅkaṉi nāval ōṅkumit tīviṉukku         15-20
   orutāṉ āki ulakutoḻat tōṉṟiṉaṉ.
   periyōṉ piṟanta peṟṟiyaik kēḷnī:
   irutuiḷa vēṉilil erikatir iṭapattu
   orupatiṉ mēlum orumūṉṟu ceṉṟapiṉ
   mīṉattu iṭainilai mīṉattu akavaiyiṉ
   pōtit talaivaṉoṭu poruntiya pōḻtattu
   maṇṇakam ellām māri iṉṟiyum
   puṇṇiya nalnīr pōtoṭu corintatu,
   pōti mātavaṉ pūmiyil tōṉṟum
   kālam aṉṟiyum kaṇṭaṉa ciṟappueṉac         15-30
   cakkara vāḷak kōṭṭam vāḻum
   mikka mātavar virumpiṉar viyantu
   kantuṭai neṭunilaik kaṭavuḷ eḻutiya
   antil pāvai aruḷu māyiṭiṉ
   aṟikuvam eṉṟē ceṟiiruḷ cēṟalum,
   maṇipal lavattiṭai maṉuyir nīttōṉ
   taṇiyā uyiruyac cāvakattu utittaṉaṉ
   āṅkuavaṉ taṉtiṟam aṟavaṇaṉ aṟiyumeṉṟu
   īṅkueṉ nāvai varuttiyatu itukēḷ:
   maṇāḷ vēntaṉ maṇmukaṉ eṉṉum        15-40
   puṇṇiya mutalvaṉ tiruntaṭi vaṇaṅki
   makkaḷai illēṉ mātavaṉ aruḷāl
   peṟṟēṉ putalvaṉai eṉṟuavaṉ vaḷarppa
   araicuāḷ celvam avaṉpāl uṇmaiyiṉ
   niraitār vēntaṉ āyiṉaṉ avaṉtāṉ.
   tuṟakka vēntaṉ tuyppuilaṉ kollō
   aṟakkōl vēntaṉ aruḷilaṉ kollō
   curantu kāviri purantunīr parakkavum
   nalattakai iṉṟi naluyirkku ellām
   alattal kālai ākiyatu āyiḻai         15-50
   veṇtirai tanta amutai vāṉōr
   uṇṭuoḻi miccilai oḻittuvait tāṅku
   vaṟaṉōṭu ulakiṉ vāṉtuyar keṭukkum
   aṟaṉōṭu oḻittal āyiḻai takātueṉa,
   mātavaṉ uraittalum maṇimē kalaitāṉ
   tāyar tammoṭu tāḻntupala ēttik
   kaikkoṇṭu eṭutta kaṭavuḷ kaṭiñaiyoṭu
   pikkuṇik kōlattup perunteru aṭaitalum,
   olittuoruṅku īṇṭiya ūrkkuṟu mākkaḷum
   melittuuku neñciṉ viṭarum tūrttarum         15-60
   koṭikkō campik kōmakaṉ ākiya
   vaṭittērt tāṉai vattavaṉ taṉṉai
   vañcam ceytuḻi vāṉtaḷai viṭīiya
   uñcaiyil tōṉṟiya ūki antaṇaṉ
   uruvukku ovvā uṟunōy kaṇṭu
   parivuuṟu mākkaḷil tāmparivu eyti,
   utaya kumaraṉ uḷamkoṇṭu oḷitta
   matumalark kuḻalāḷ vantu tōṉṟip
   piccaip pāttiram kaiyiṉēn tiyatu
   tippiyam eṉṟē cintainōy kūra,         15-70
   maṇamaṉai maṟukil mātavi īṉṟa
   aṇimalarp pūṅkompu akammali uvakaiyiṉ
   pattiṉi peṇṭir paṇpuṭaṉ iṭūum
   piccai ēṟṟal peruntakavu uṭaittueṉa,
   kuḷaṉaṇi tāmaraik koḻumalar nāppaṇ
   orutaṉi ōṅkiya tirumalar pōṉṟu
   vāṉtaru kaṟpiṉ maṉaiuṟai makaḷiril
   tāṉtaṉi ōṅkiya takaimaiyaḷ aṉṟō
   ātirai nallāḷ avaḷmaṉai immaṉai
   nīpukal vēṇṭum nēriḻai eṉṟaṉaḷ
   vaṭaticai viñcai mānakart tōṉṟit         15-80
   teṉticaip potiyilōr ciṟṟiyāṟṟu aṭaikarai
   mātavaṉ taṉṉāl valviṉai uruppac
   cāpam paṭṭut taṉittuyar uṟūum
   vīvil vempaci vēṭkaiyoṭu tiritarum
   kāyacaṇ ṭikaieṉum kārikai tāṉeṉ.
   pāttiramkoṇṭu piccai pukka kātai muṟṟiṟṟu.
   -----------

                  Chapter 15. Manimekalai feeds the people

   Aravanar continues to tell the story of Āputhiran
   “O you lovely as a vine, hear me.
   In the cool white Javaga mountains
   lived a divine sage named Manmuhan.
   He had a cow with golden horns and golden feet
   that gave milk unselfishly to all
   even before it gave birth to its calves. 15-010
   Hear how the great Āputhiran was reborn
   and became the king of Javaga country.
   Āputhiran gave his life in Manipallavam,
   so that he could be born again to do charity
   and take away the sickness of hunger.
   He kept the love of the cow that gave him milk when he was a baby
   and protected him in his previous birth.
   In this birth he was born to sage Manmuhan’s cow to save the world.
   Because of him rain pours and makes the land flourish
   and the creatures of the world are protected.
   He was not born with an umbilical cord
   but was born from a golden egg.
   The gods were pleased when he was born.
   He was born on this island filled with sweet fruits
   and all the world worshiped his birth. 15-020
   Āputhiran was reborn in the spring,
   on the thirteenth day after the beginning of the month of Vaikasi
   under the star of Visāka, on the full moon day—
   the same time of year lord Buddha was born.
   Even though there was no rain when he was born,
   pure water and flowers poured down everywhere.
   Seeing the events that happened,
   the sages in Chakravālakkottam were surprised and said,
   ‘Even though it is not the year when the Buddha was born,
   the earth is flourishing!’ 15-030.
   Aravanar tells how the sages went to Kanthil Pāvai
   The sages decided to go to the Kanthil Pāvai
   that was on a tall pillar and ask it for its grace
   to tell them what had happened if it were willing.
   They went to the Kanthil Pāvai in the dark night.
   The Kanthil Pāvai saw them and said,
   ‘Āputhiran gave his life on the island of Manipallavam
   and was reborn born in Jāvagam to save the lives of creatures.
   The sage Aravanar knows about the life of Āputhiran.
   You should go and ask Aravanar about Āputhiran.’ 15-040
   Aravanar tells the story of Āputhiran reborn as Punniyarājan
   Listen to what I know about Āputhiran. The king Bhumichandran worshiped
   the divine feet
   of the sage Manmuhan and got a son through his grace.
   He was happy and thought, ‘I did not have children
   and now I have a son by the grace of the sage.’
   He took the child and raised him
   and the child became the garlanded king of Jāvagam
   since he was raised by the king of that land.
   At that time a famine came in that country of Jāvagam.
   Did it come because of Indra, the king of the sky
   who did not know the importance of food?
   Or because the king of the country was not compassionate?
   Even though the Kaviri river was filled with water
   there was no rain and people did not get food. 15-050
   O you with beautiful ornaments,
   the pot you have will take away the terrible suffering of hunger.
   You should not hide it away from people.
   It is like the time when the milky ocean was churned
   and the gods drank the nectar that came out of it
   and hid the rest without giving it to the Asuras. It is not right.”
   After hearing Aravanar
   Manimekalai bowed to him with Sudhamathi and Mādhavi,
   and went out on the large streets with her divine pot. 15-060
   Many people were on the street making noise—
   bad people suffering in their hearts with lust,
   and coarse people in the city.
   They looked as if they were crazy,
   like Yugi, the Brahmin minister of Udayanan,
   who disguised himself as a disturbed person
   and wandered the streets of Unjai
   to release Udayanan, the victorious king of Kosambi,
   when Udayanan was imprisoned by his enemy Prachodanan
   At that time, beautiful Manimekalai,
   whom the prince Udayakumaran loved,
   her hair decorated with flowers dripping with honey,
   came carrying the begging pot in her hand as a female Bhikshu.
   Manimekalai meets the apsaras Kāyasandihai
   Then Kāyasandihai, an apsaras from heaven
   was wandering about hungry because she had been cursed
   by a sage on the bank of a small river
   in Vinjai city on the Potiya mountain in the south.
   Kāyasandihai saw Manimekalai and told her,
   “O, daughter of Mādhavi, adorned with lovely ornaments,
   you should receive food from a pot
   from a chaste, lovely woman.
   Āthirai is the most chaste women among all women
   and this is her home. Go inside.” 15-086.
   -----------

               cīttalai cāttaṉāriṉ ”maṇimēkalai”
                āṅkila moḻipeyarppu - kaucalyā hārṭ
                         pākam 2 (attiyāyam 16-30)
         Manimekalai of Settalai Chathanar - part 2 (chapters 16-30)
                        ____________________________

                     16. ātirai piccai iṭṭa kātai
                    [ maṇimēkalaikku ātirai eṉṉum
             pattiṉippeṇṭir pāttūṇ ītta pāṭṭu ]

       īṅkuivaḷ ceyti kēḷeṉa viñcaiyar
       pūṅkoṭi mātarkkup pukuntatai uraippōṉ:
       ātirai kaṇavaṉ āyiḻai kēḷāy
       cātuvaṉ eṉpōṉ takavuilaṉ āki
       aṇiyiḻai taṉṉai akaṉṟaṉaṉ pōkik
       kaṇikai orutti kaittūṇ nalka
       vaṭṭiṉum cūtiṉum vāṉporuḷ vaḻaṅkik
       keṭṭa poruḷiṉ kiḷaikēṭu uṟutaliṉ
       pēṇiya kaṇikaiyum piṟarnalam kāṭṭik
       kāṇam ilieṉak kaiutirk kōṭalum,         16-10
       vaṅkam pōkum vāṇikar tammuṭaṉ
       taṅkā vēṭkaiyiṉ tāṉum celvuḻi,
       naḷiiru munnīr vaḷikalaṉ vauva
       oṭimaram paṟṟi ūrtirai utaippa
       nakka cāraṇar nākar vāḻmalaip
       pakkam cārntatuavar pāṉmaiyaṉ āyiṉaṉ.
       nāvāy kēṭuuṟa naṉmaram paṟṟip
       pōyiṉaṉ taṉṉōṭu uyiruyap pōntōr
       iṭaiiruḷ yāmattu eṟitiraip peruṅkaṭal
       uṭaikalap paṭṭāṅku oḻintōr tammuṭaṉ         16-20
       cātuvaṉ tāṉum cāvuṟ ṟāṉeṉa,
       ātirai nallāḷ āṅkuatu tāṉkēṭṭu
       ūrī rēyō oḷaḻal īmam
       tārī rōeṉac cāṟṟiṉaḷ kaḻaṟic
       cuṭalaik kāṉil toṭukuḻip paṭuttu
       muṭalai viṟakiṉ muḷieri potti
       mikkaeṉ kaṇavaṉ viṉaippayaṉ uyppap
       pukkuḻip pukuvēṉ eṉṟuavaḷ pukutalum,
       paṭuttuṭaṉ vaitta pāyal paḷḷiyum
       uṭutta kūṟaiyum oḷeri uṟāatu         16-30
       āṭiya cāntamum acainta kūntalil
       cūṭiya mālaiyum tolniṟam vaḻātu
       viraimalart tāmarai orutaṉi irunta
       tiruviṉ ceyyōḷ pōṉṟuiṉitu iruppat,
       tīyum kollāt tīviṉai yāṭṭiyēṉ
       yātu ceykēṉ eṉṟuavaḷ ēṅkalum,
       ātirai kēḷuṉ arumpeṟal kaṇavaṉai
       ūrtirai koṇṭāṅku uyppap pōki
       nakka cāraṇar nākar vāḻmalaip
       pakkam cērntaṉaṉ palliyāṇṭu irāaṉ         16-40
       cantira tattaṉ eṉumōr vāṇikaṉ
       vaṅkam taṉṉoṭum vantaṉaṉ tōṉṟum
       niṉperun tuṉpam oḻivāy nīyeṉa
       antaram tōṉṟi acarīri aṟaitalum,
       aiari uṇkaṇ aḻutuyar nīṅkip
       poykaipukku āṭip pōtuvāḷ pōṉṟu
       maṉaṅkavalvu iṉṟi maṉaiyakam pukuntueṉ
       kaṇmaṇi aṉaiyāṉ kaṭituīṅku uṟukeṉap
       puṇṇiya muṭṭāḷ poḻimaḻai tarūum
       arumpeṟal marapiṉ pattiṉip peṇṭirum nbsp;       16-50
       virumpiṉar toḻūum viyappiṉaḷ āyiṉaḷ.
       āṅkuavaḷ kaṇavaṉum alainīr aṭaikarai
       ōṅkuuyar piṟaṅkal orumara nīḻal
       mañcuuṭai mālkaṭal uḻantanōy kūrntu
       tuñcutuyil koḷḷa, ac cūrmalai vāḻum
       nakka cāraṇar nayamilar tōṉṟip
       pakkam cērntu paripulam piṉaṉivaṉ
       tāṉē tamiyaṉ vantaṉaṉ aḷiyaṉ
       ūṉuṭai ivvuṭampu uṇavueṉṟu eḻuppalum,
       maṟṟavar pāṭai mayakkuaṟu marapiṉ         16-60
       kaṟṟaṉaṉ ātaliṉ kaṭuntoḻil mākkaḷ
       cuṟṟu nīṅkit toḻutuurai yāṭi
       āṅkuavar uraippōr aruntiṟal kēḷāy
       īṅkuem kurumakaṉ iruntōṉ avaṉpāl
       pōntuaruḷ nīeṉa avaruṭaṉ pōki,
       kaḷaṭu kuḻiciyum kaḻimuṭai nāṟṟamum
       veḷeṉpu uṇaṅkalum viraviya irukkaiyil
       eṇkutaṉ piṇavōṭu iruntatu pōlap
       peṇṭuṭaṉ irunta peṟṟi nōkkip
       pāṭaiyil piṇittuavaṉ pāṉmaiyaṉ ākik         16-70
       kōṭuuyar maraniḻal kuḷirnta piṉavaṉ
       īṅkunī vanta kāraṇam eṉeṉa
       āṅkuavaṟku alaikaṭal uṟṟatai uraittalum,
       aruntutal iṉṟi alaikaṭal uḻantōṉ
       varuntiṉaṉ aḷiyaṉ vammiṉ mākkāḷ
       nampikku iḷaiyaḷōr naṅkaiyaik koṭuttu
       veṅkaḷum ūṉum vēṇṭuva koṭumeṉa,
       avvurai kēṭṭa cātuvaṉ ayarntu
       vevvurai kēṭṭēṉ vēṇṭēṉ eṉṟalum,
       peṇṭirum uṇṭiyum iṉṟueṉiṉ mākkaṭku         16-80
       uṇṭō ñālattu uṟupayaṉ uṇṭu eṉil
       kāṇkuvam yāṅkaḷum kāṭṭuvā yāka eṉat
       tūṇṭiya ciṉattiṉaṉ coleṉac collum:
       mayakkum kaḷḷum maṉuyir kōṟalum
       kayakkuaṟu mākkaḷ kaṭintaṉar kēḷāy:
       piṟantavar cātalum iṟantavar piṟattalum
       uṟaṅkalum viḻittalum pōṉṟatu uṇmaiyiṉ
       nalaṟam ceyvōr nalulaku aṭaitalum
       allaṟam ceyvōr arunaraku aṭaitalum
       uṇṭueṉa uṇartaliṉ uravōr kaḷaintaṉar         16-90
       kaṇṭaṉai yākeṉa, kaṭunakai eyti
       uṭampuviṭṭu ōṭum uyiruruk koṇṭuōr
       iṭampukum eṉṟē emakkuīṅku uraittāy
       avvuyir evvaṇam pōyppukum avvakai
       cevvaṉam uraieṉa, ciṉavātu itukēḷ
       uṟṟatai uṇarum uṭaluyir vāḻvuḻi
       maṟṟaiya uṭampē maṉuyir nīṅkiṭil
       taṭintueri ūṭṭiṉum tāṉuṇa rātueṉiṉ
       uṭampiṭaip pōṉatuoṉṟu uṇṭueṉa uṇarnī
       pōṉār tamakkuōr pukkiluṇṭu eṉpatu         16-100
       yāṉō vallēṉ yāvarum uṇarkuvar
       uṭampuīṇṭu oḻiya uyirpala kāvatam
       kaṭantucēṇ cēṟal kaṉaviṉum kāṇkuvai
       āṅkaṉam pōki avvuyir ceyviṉai
       pūṇṭa yākkaiyiṉ pukuvatu teḷinī
       eṉṟuavaṉ uraittalum eriviḻi nākaṉum
       naṉṟuaṟi ceṭṭi nalaṭi vīḻntu
       kaḷḷum ūṉum kaiviṭiṉ ivvuṭampu
       uḷuṟai vāḻuyir ōmputal āṟṟēṉ
       tamakkuoḻi marapiṉ cāvuṟu kāṟum         16-110
       emakkuām nalaṟam eṭuttuurai eṉṟalum,
       naṉṟu coṉṉāy nalneṟip paṭarkuvai
       uṉtaṉakku ollum neṟiaṟam uraikkēṉ
       uṭaikala mākkaḷ uyiruyntu īṅkuuṟiṉ
       aṭutoḻil oḻintuavar āruyir ōmpi,
       mūttuviḷi māoḻittu evvuyir māṭṭum
       tīttiṟam oḻikeṉa, ciṟumakaṉ uraippōṉ
       īṅkuemakku ākum ivvaṟam ceykēm
       āṅkuuṉakku ākum arumporuḷ koḷkeṉap
       paṇṭum paṇṭum kalamkaviḻ mākkaḷai         16-120
       uṇṭēm avartam uṟuporuḷ īṅkuivai
       viraimaram meṉtukil viḻunitik kuppaiyōṭu
       ivaiivai koḷkeṉa eṭuttaṉaṉ koṇarntu
       cantira tattaṉ eṉṉum vāṇikaṉ
       vaṅkam cērntatil vantuuṭaṉ ēṟi
       innakar pukuntuīṅku ivaḷoṭu vāḻntu
       taṉmaṉai naṉpala tāṉamum ceytaṉaṉ,
       āṅṅaṉam ākiya ātirai kaiyāl
       pūṅkoṭi nallāy piccai peṟukeṉa,
       maṉaiyakam pukuntu maṇimē kalaitāṉ         16-130
       puṉaiyā ōviyam pōla niṟṟalum
       toḻutu valamkoṇṭu tuyaraṟu kiḷaviyōṭu
       amuta curapiyiṉ akaṉcurai niṟaitarap
       pārakam aṭaṅkalum pacippiṇi aṟukeṉa
       ātirai iṭṭaṉaḷ āruyir maruntueṉ.
       ātirai piccai iṭṭa kātai muṟṟiṟṟu.
       ------------

               Chapter 16. The story of Sāduvan and Āthirai
       Kāyasandihai tells Manimekalai the story of Āthirai.
       Kāyasandihai, lovely as a vine, said,
       “O ornamented Manimekalai, hear me.
       Āthirai’s husband, Sāduvan did improper things
       and became interested in a courtesan who fed him well.
       He left his ornamented wife and went to the courtesan’s home,
       ate the food she gave and lived with her happily.
       He gambled, gave her much wealth and lost all his money.
       She pretended to love him
       but became interested in other men and left him
       after he had lost all his gold and wealth.16-010
       Sāduvan became poor, got on a boat
       and sailed with some merchants to another country to earn wealth.
       On the way wind stormed on the wide ocean and his ship sank.
       He held onto a broken piece of wood floating on the waves
       and came ashore in the hilly Naga land where Nakka Saranar lived.
       Others on the ship survived holding onto pieces of wood in the
       storm
       and came to where Āthirai lived.
       Āthirai heard from the sailers
       that in the night the ship had broken apart in the night
       in the stormy waves on the wide ocean
       and that Sāduvan had lost his life with others. 16-020.
       Āthirai called the villagers, cried out and said,
       ‘Make a fire for me and I will die!’
       In the burning ground a hole was dug and a fire was started.
       She said, ‘If I enter the fire all the bad karma
       of my husband will be removed’
       but her clothes and the bed she lay on did not burn.
       The sandal paste she had smeared on her body
       and the flowers on her curly hair did not even change color. 16-030
       Looking like Lakshmi sweetly seated on a fragrant blooming lotus,
       she cried out, ‘I am a sinner. Even fire does not burn me!’
       Suddenly a voice from the sky said,
       ‘Listen, Āthirai, your beloved husband
       was pushed by the waves and did not die.
       He survived and reached the hills where Nakka Sāranar Nāgar lives.
       He will not live there many years 16-040
       but will come here on the ship of the merchant Chandradathan.
       Do not worry and suffer.’
       She stopped crying and wiped the tears from her eyes adorned with
       kohl.
       She looked as if she had gone to bathe in a pond
       and returned home without any trouble.
       All the chaste women of the village were surprised
       and praised and worshiped her.
       If such women ask rain to come, it will come.
       She thought that her husband,
       as dear to her as the pupil of her eyes, would soon come. 16-050
       Her husband was pushed ashore under the shadow of a tree
       near a tall hill haunted by spirits.
       He was exhausted after suffering in the ocean in the storm and went
       to sleep.
       Some Nakka Sāranars living on that fearful island came near him and
       said, ‘This poor man seems left alone and has suffered a lot.
       Should we eat him?’ They woke him up. 16-060
       He bowed to them
       and spoke to them in their hunter language, which he knew
       faultlessly.
       They said, ‘You are a capable person. Listen.
       Our teacher, our leader, Gurumahan is here.
       Come with us and we will take you to him.’
       Sāduvan went with the Sāranars to their leader.
       Their chief Gurumahan was sitting,
       surrounded with toddy pots, meat and dried stinking bones.
       As he sat with his wife, they looked like a male and a female bear
       together. 16-070
       Sāduvan talked to Gurumahan in his own language,
       made him his friend,
       and Gurumahan had him rest under the cool shadow of a tree.
       Then Gurumahan asked Sāduvan the reason he had come to the island.
       Sāduvan told him that there had been a storm
       when he came on a ship and he had escaped the storm
       and come to the island.
       The people on the ship had gone away thinking
       that he was on the boat.
       Gurumahan told his men,
       ‘He did not have any food and suffered in the wave-filled ocean.
       Pity! He suffered a lot and has not eaten anything.
       For this young man, give a young girl,
       meat and toddy as much as he wants.’
       Hearing the words of the Gurumahan
       Sāduvan was shocked and said, 16-080
       ‘These are evil things. I do not want them.’
       Gurumahan grew angry and asked him, “If there is no toddy and no
       girls, what is there to live for?
       If there is anything other than these, show us, and we will see.’
       Sāduvan said, ‘Faultless good people
       do not drink toddy that confuses their minds,
       and do not kill people. Hear me.
       It is true that people are born, die and are born again.
       It is like sleeping and waking up.
       If people do good deeds, they will go to heaven,
       but if they do bad deeds, they will go to a terrible hell.
       Good people understand this and do not want to drink
       or have relationships with women. Know this.’ 16-090
       Gurumahan laughed loudly and asked,
       ‘You said that one’s life goes away from body and enters another
       body.
       How can a life go and enter another body?
       Explain that to us.’
       Sāduvan was not angry and said quietly,
       ‘When a body has life,
       it has feelings and knows what happens to it.
       After life leaves the body,
       even when it is burned it feels nothing.
       You can understand that there is something
       that feels and leaves the body. 16-100
       Everyone knows that there is for a life to go to
       after it has left its body.
       This is not a truth that only I know.
       In dreams, one’s life can travel for hundreds of miles
       and reach another place.
       The life that leaves a body enters another body
       as a result of its karma in previous births.
       Understand this.’
       Fiery-eyed Gurumahan of the Naga tribe
       fell at the feet of the wise merchant Sāduvan
       who knows what is good and said,
       “If I do not drink and eat meat
       I do not know how to survive.
       Tell us of the good dharma
       that would allow us to live faultlessly until we die.’ 16-110
       Sāduvan said, ‘You understand now.
       If you wish to live in a good way, I will tell you a good way to
       live.
       Save the people who survive and reach the shore
       after their ships break up and sink in the ocean.
       Do not kill them and eat their flesh—
       save them and take care of them.
       Only eat the meat of old animals that have died naturally.
       Do not hurt any creature.’
       Gurumahan said , ‘We will follow your advice.
       When ships sank near our shores,
       we would eat the dead people and take their wealth.
       Here are things that belong to those sailors. Take what you want.
       16-120
       Here are fragrant sandalwood, precious jewels and soft clothes.’
       He brought many valuable things and gave them to Sāduvan.
       When a merchant named Chandradathan,
       came to the island of Gurumahan,
       Sāduvan sailed with him on his ship and arrived at his home.
       He lived with Āthirai in his house and performed many charitable
       acts.”
       Kāyasandihai said, “Manimekalai, as beautiful as a blooming vine,
       go and accept alms from the divine Āthirai.”
       Manimekalai went to Āthirai’s home 16-130
       and stood like a painting in front of her house.
       Āthirai worshiped Manimekalai, circled her and said,
       “May hunger be unknown in the whole world.”
       Food, the wonderful remedy for hunger, filled the pot Amudhasurabhi
       and from it Āthirai gave food to Manimekalai. 16-135
       ----------
                           __________________________

       Part 4. Udayakumaran and Kānchanan. The story of Kāyasandihai
                       17. ulaka aṟavi pukka kātai
[ maṇimēkalai kāyacaṇṭikai eṉṉum viccātari vayiṟṟu yāṉaittīavittu
                          ampalampukka pāṭṭu ]

       pattiṉip peṇṭir pāttūṇ ēṟṟa
       piccaip pāttirap peruñcōṟṟu amalai
       aṟattiṉ īṭṭiya oṇporuḷ aṟavōṉ
       tiṟattu vaḻippaṭūum ceykai pōla
       vāṅkukai varunta maṉuyirkku aḷittuta
       tāṉtolaivu illāt takaimai nōkki,
       yāṉait tīnōy akavayiṟṟu aṭakkiya
       kāyacaṇ ṭikaieṉum kārikai vaṇaṅki
       neṭiyōṉ mayaṅki nilamicait tōṉṟi
       aṭalaru munnīr aṭaitta ñāṉṟu nbsp;       17-10
       kuraṅkukoṇarntu eṟinta neṭumalai ellām
       aṇaṅkuuṭai aḷakkar vayiṟu pukkāṅku
       iṭṭatu āṟṟāk kaṭṭaḻal kaṭumpacip
       paṭṭēṉ eṉtaṉ paḻaviṉaip payattāl
       aṉṉai kēḷnī āruyir maruttuvi
       tuṉṉiya eṉnōy tuṭaippāy eṉṟalum,
       eṭutta pāttirattu ēntiya amutam
       piṭittatuavaḷ kaiyil pēṇiṉaḷ peytalum
       vayiṟukāy perumpaci nīṅki maṟṟavaḷ
       tuyaram nīṅkit toḻutaṉaḷ uraikkum:         17-20
       mācuil vāloḷi vaṭaticaic cēṭik
       kācuilkāñ caṉapurak kaṭinakar uḷḷēṉ
       viñcaiyaṉ taṉṉoṭueṉ vevviṉai uruppat
       teṉticaip potiyil kāṇiya vantēṉ
       kaṭuvaral aruvik kaṭumpuṉal koḻitta
       iṭumaṇal kāṉiyāṟṟu iyaintuoruṅku iruntēṉ
       purinūl mārpil tiripuri vārcaṭai
       marauri uṭaiyaṉ viruccikaṉ eṉpōṉ
       peruṅkulaip peṇṇaik karuṅkaṉi aṉaiyatuōr
       iruṅkaṉi nāval paḻamoṉṟu ēntit         17-30
       tēkkuilai vaittuc cēṇnāṟu parappil
       pūkkamaḻ poykai āṭac ceṉṟōṉ
       tīviṉai uruttaliṉ cerukkoṭu ceṉṟēṉ
       kālāl antak karuṅkaṉi citaittēṉ
       uṇṭal vēṭkaiyiṉ varūum viruccikaṉ
       kaṇṭaṉaṉ eṉṉaik karuṅkaṉic citaivuṭaṉ
       cīrtikaḻ nāvalil tippiya
       īrāṟu āṇṭil orukaṉi taruvatu
       akkaṉi uṇṭōr āṟuīr āṇṭu
       makkaḷ yākkaiyiṉ varumpaci nīṅkuvar         17-40
       paṉṉī rāṇṭil orunāḷ allatu
       uṇṇā nōṉpiṉēṉ uṇkaṉi citaittāy
       antaram cellum mantiram iḻantu
       tantit tīyāl taṉittuyar uḻantu
       munnāl āṇṭil mutirkaṉi nāṉīṅku
       uṇṇum nāḷuṉ uṟupaci kaḷaikeṉa
       annāḷ āṅkuavaṉ iṭṭa cāpam
       innāḷ pōlum iḷaṅkoṭi keṭuttaṉai
       vāṭupaci uḻantu māmuṉi pōyapiṉ
       pāṭuimiḻ aruvip payamalai oḻintueṉ         17-50
       alavalaic ceytikku añciṉaṉ akaṉṟa
       ilakuoḷi viñcaiyaṉ viḻumamōṭu eyti
       āraṇaṅku ākiya aruntavaṉ taṉṉāl
       kāraṇam iṉṟiyum kaṭunōy uḻantaṉai
       vāṉūṭu eḻukeṉa mantiram maṟantēṉ
       ūṉuyir nīṅkum uruppoṭu tōṉṟi
       vayiṟukāy perumpaci varuttumeṉṟēṟkut
       tīṅkaṉi kiḻaṅku ceḻuṅkāy nallaṉa
       āṅkuavaṉ koṇaravum āṟṟē ṉāka
       nīṅkal āṟṟāṉ neṭuntuyar eyti         17-60
       āṅkuavaṉ āṅkueṉakku aruḷoṭum uraippōṉ
       camput tīviṉuḷ tamiḻaka maruṅkil
       kampam illāk kaḻiperuñ celvar
       āṟṟā mākkaṭku āṟṟumtuṇai āki
       nōṟṟōr uṟaivatuōr nōṉnakar uṇṭāl
       palanāḷ āyiṉum nilaṉoṭu pōki
       appatip pukukeṉṟu avaṉaruḷ ceyya
       ippatip pukuntuīṅku yāṉuṟai kiṉṟēṉ
       intira kōṭaṇai viḻavuaṇi varunāḷ
       vantu tōṉṟiim mānakar maruṅkē         17-70
       eṉuṟu perumpaci kaṇṭaṉaṉ iraṅkip
       piṉvarum yāṇṭuavaṉ eṇṇiṉaṉ kaḻiyum
       taṇivuil vempaci tavirttaṉai vaṇaṅkiṉēṉ
       maṇimē kalaieṉ vāṉpatip paṭarkēṉ
       tukkam tuṭaikkum tukaḷaṟu mātavar
       cakkara vāḷak kōṭṭamuṇṭu āṅkuatil
       palarpukat tiṟanta pakuvāy vāyil
       ulaka aṟavi oṉṟuuṇṭu ataṉiṭai
       ūrūr āṅkaṇ uṟupaci uḻantōr
       ārum iṉmaiyiṉ arumpiṇi uṟṟōr         17-80
       iṭuvōrt tērntuāṅku iruppōr palarāl
       vaṭuvāḻ kūntal ataṉpāl pōkeṉṟu
       āṅkuavaḷ pōkiya piṉṉar -āyiḻai
       ōṅkiya vītiyiṉ orupuṭai otuṅki
       valamuṟai mummuṟai vantaṉai ceytuav
       ulaka aṟaviyiṉ orutaṉi ēṟip
       patiyōr tammoṭu palartoḻutu ēttum
       mutiyōḷ kōṭṭam mummaiyiṉ vaṇaṅkik
       kantuuṭai neṭunilaik kāraṇam kāṭṭiya
       tamtuṇaip pāvaiyait tāṉtoḻutu ētti         17-90
       veyilcuṭa vempiya vēykari kāṉattuk
       karuvi māmaḻai tōṉṟiyatu eṉṉapa
       pacitiṉa varuntiya paital mākkaṭku
       amuta curapiyōṭu āyiḻai tōṉṟi
       āput tiraṉkai amuta curapiiḵtu
       yāvarum varuka ēṟpōr tāmeṉa,
       ūṇoli aravattu olieḻun taṉṟē
       yāṇarp pērūr ampalam maruṅkueṉ.         17-98
       ulaka aṟavi pukka kātai muṟṟiṟṟu.
       ---------------

                   Chapter 17. The story of Kāyasandihai
       Manimekalai enters the Ulaga Aravi temple
       After that, Manimekalai gave food from the Amudhasurabhi to all the
       people
       and there was much bustling and noise where she fed them.
       More and more people, animals and birds gathered there.
       The pot, continually filling up,
       was like a generous man’s treasure earned honestly.
       The hands of those receiving the food hurt
       because the food was so abundant.
       The story of Kāyasandihai, an apsaras.
       At that time Kāyasandihai an apsaras saw Manimekalai.
       Kāyasandihai an aparas came from the sky with her husband
       She had been cursed by a sage and become sick
       with the yānnaitee sickness that gives insatiable hunger.
       She saw Manimekalai as she was feeding people
       and saw that her pot always became full.
       She approached Manimekalai, bowed to her 17-010
       and asked her to give her food.
       She said, “My hunger is like the stones submerged into the ocean
       thrown there by the monkeys when Rama, the tall Vishnu,
       tried to fill the water of the ocean when he was going to Lanka.
       I became hungry all the time because of my previous karma.
       You are my healer, dear as my life.
       Cure me of this sickness of terrible hunger.”
       Manimekalai took some food from the Amudhasurabhi
       and put it in the hands of Kāyasandihai
       and her hunger was appeased and she was cured.
       The story of Kāyasandihai and the sage Viruchigan
       Kāyasandihai bowed to Manimekalai and said, 17-020
       “I come from a place called Kānchanapuram in the north
       that shines as bright as the world of the angels.
       I came with my husband Kānchanan from that world of the Vidyādharas
       to see the Potiya mountains in the south.
       We were staying together on the bank of a river
       where the water from a waterfall drops from the hills. 17-030
       Viruchigan, a rishi wearing a dress of leaves
       and a sacred thread on his chest came there
       bringing in his hands a ripe nāval fruit
       as large as the fruit of a palm tree.
       He placed it on the leaf of a thekku tree
       and went to take a bath in a pond in the distance
       where fragrant flowers were blooming.
       Because of my bad karma,
       I arrogantly went near the fruit and crushed it with my feet.
       The sage returned desiring eat the fruit
       and saw that I had crushed it.
       He cursed me, ‘This is a special fruit known to all.
       It ripens only once every twelve years. 17-040
       If someone eats this fruit he will not be hungry for twelve years.
       I have not eaten for twelve years
       and have been waiting for this fruit to ripen,
       but you crushed it and destroyed it.
       You will suffer for twelve years
       from the yānaithee sickness that gives insatiable hunger.
       This fruit will ripen again and I will eat it,
       and on that day your hunger will go away,’
       after saying this, the sage left. 17-050
       After giving me the curse, the monk left.
       My husband the Vidyādhara,
       afraid for what had happened to me,
       left the prosperous hills with sounding waterfalls where he lived,
       came to me and said,
       ‘For no reason you are suffering with yānaithee sickness
       because of the curse of the powerful monk. 17-060
       Come with me to the sky.’
       I told him that I had forgotten the spell to go to the sky world.
       He brought some sweet fruit, roots
       and other vegetables and gave them to me,
       but my hunger did not go away and I suffered.
       My husband did not leave me
       He suffered with me and told me affectionately
       ’On the island of Champuthevu near the Tamil country,
       many rich people live with limitless wealth
       and they feed the poor and help them.
       People suffering like you go there to get help.
       It is far from here, you can still walk
       and reach it by way of land.’
       I came to this land and stayed here. 17 -070.
       On the day of Indra’s festival my husband comes to see me
       and leaves counting the days to when my curse will be removed.
       O vine-like young girl, my hunger has gone
       after I ate the food you gave me from the Amudhasurabhi
       Ṭhis must be the day the sage meant
       when he said my hunger would go away.
       Manimekalai, you removed my hunger that never went away.
       I worship you.
       I will go to my sky world to a place called Chakravāla Koottam.
       In that place is an Ulaga Aravi temple with an open door
       that anyone can enter.
       Those suffering with hunger, sick people
       and orphans without anyone to protect them
       stay there looking for people to help them. 17-080
       O you with lovely hair, you should go there.”
       After telling Manimekalai her whole story
       Kāyasandihai went to her world in the sky.
       Manimekalai feeds the people in the temple.
       After Kāyasandihai left,
       Manimekalai walked alone to the end of the long street
       and worshiped the goddess Muthiyāl in the Ulaga Aravi temple,
       circling three times from right to left
       and also worshiped the Kanthil Pāvai there. 17-090
       She praised the Kanthil Pāvai, went out of that temple and said,
       “I have the Amuthasurabi that young Āputhiran gave me from his
       hands.
       Come, I will give you all the food you want.”
       She looked like the rain that pours down
       in a hot forest where the bamboo has been burned dark by the sun.
       In the temple all the hungry people gathered
       and noise arose as they ate. 17-098
       ----------
                           __________________________

                   18. utayakumaraṉ ampalam pukka kātai
   [ maṇimēkalai ampalam aṭaintamai cittirāpati utayakumaraṉukkuc
                   colla avaṉ ampalampukka pāṭṭu ]

       āṅkuatu kēṭṭuāṅku arumpuṇ akavayiṉ
       tīttuṟu ceṅkōl ceṉṟucuṭ ṭāṅkuk
       kotitta uḷḷamoṭu kurampukoṇṭu ēṟi
       vitippuuṟu neñciṉaḷ veytuyirttuk kalaṅkit
       tīrppaliv aṟameṉac cittirā patitāṉ
       kūttiyal maṭantaiyarkku ellām kūṟum
       kōvalaṉ iṟantapiṉ koṭuntuyar eyti
       mātavi mātavar paḷḷiyuḷ aṭaintatu
       nakutak kaṉṟē nalneṭum pērūr
       itutakku eṉpōrkku eḷurai āyatu         18-10
       kātalaṉ vīyak kaṭuntuyar eytip
       pōtal ceyyā uyiroṭu pulantu
       naḷiirum poykai āṭunar pōla
       muḷierip pukūum mutukuṭip piṟanta
       pattiṉip peṇṭir allēm palartam
       kaittūṇ vāḻkkai kaṭaviyam aṉṟē
       pāṇmakaṉ paṭṭuḻip paṭūum pāṉmaiil
       yāḻiṉam pōlum iyalpiṉam aṉṟiyum
       naṟuntātu uṇṭu nayaṉil kālai
       vaṟumpūt tuṟakkum vaṇṭu pōlkuvam         18-20
       viṉaioḻi kālait tiruviṉ celvi
       aṉaiyēm āki āṭavart tuṟappēm
       tāpatak kōlam tāṅkiṉam eṉpatu
       yāvarum nakūum iyalpiṉatu aṉṟē
       mātavi īṉṟa maṇimē kalaivalli
       pōtuaviḻ cevvi poruntutal virumpiya
       utaya kumaraṉām ulaku āḷ vaṇṭiṉ
       citaiyā uḷḷam cevvitiṉ aruntak
       kaikkoṇṭu āṅkuavaḷ ēntiya kaṭiñaiyaip
       piccai mākkaḷ piṟarkaik kāṭṭi         18-30
       maṟṟuavaṉ taṉṉāl maṇimē kalaitaṉaip
       poṉtērk koṇṭu pōtēṉ ākil urai
       cuṭumaṇ ēṟṟi araṅkucūḻ pōki
       vaṭuvoṭu vāḻum maṭantaiyar tammōr
       aṉaiyēṉ āki araṅkak kūttiyar
       maṉaiyakam pukāa marapiṉaṉ eṉṟē
       vañciṉam cāṟṟi neñcupukai uyirttu,
       vañcak kiḷavi māṇpoṭu tērntu
       ceṟivaḷai nallār cilarpuṟam cūḻak
       kuṟuviyar poṭitta kōlavāḷ mukattaḷ         18-40
       kaṭuntēr vīti kāliṉ pōki
       iḷaṅkō vēntaṉ iruppiṭam kuṟuki
       arava vaṇṭoṭu tēṉiṉam ārkkum
       tarumaṇal ñemiriya tirunāṟu oruciṟaip
       pavaḻat tūṇattup
       tikaḻoḷi nittilac cittira vitāṉattu
       viḷaṅkuoḷi paranta paḷiṅkucey maṇṭapattut
       tuḷaṅkumāṉ ūrtit tūmalarp paḷḷi
       veṇtirai virinta veṇṇiṟac cāmarai
       koṇṭuiru maruṅkum kōtaiyar vīca         18-50
       iruntōṉ tiruntaṭi poruntiniṉṟu ētti,
       tiruntueyiṟu ilaṅkac cevviyiṉ nakkuavaṉ
       mātavi maṇimē kalaiyuṭaṉ eytiya
       tāpatak kōlam tavaṟuiṉ ṟōeṉa,
       aritupeṟu ciṟappil kurukukaru uyirppa
       orutaṉi ōṅkiya tirumaṇik kāñci
       pāṭalcāl ciṟappiṉ paratattu ōṅkiya
       nāṭakam virumpa naṉṉalaṅ kaviṉik
       kāmar cevvik kaṭimalar aviḻnta
       utaya kumaraṉ eṉum oruvaṇ ṭuuṇīiya         18-60
       viraivoṭu vantēṉ viyaṉperu mūtūrp
       pāḻm paṟantalai ampalattu āyatu
       vāḻkaniṉ kaṇṇi vāyvāḷ vēntu eṉa
       ōṅkiya pauvat tuuṭaikalap paṭṭōṉ
       vāṉpuṇai peṟṟeṉa maṟṟu avaṭ kuuraippōṉ
       mēviya paḷiṅkiṉ viruntiṉ pāvaiiḵtu
       ōviyac ceytieṉṟu oḻivēṉ muṉṉark
       kāntaḷam ceṅkai taḷaipiṇi viṭāa
       ēntuiḷa vaṉamulai iṟainerit tatūum
       ottuoḷir pavaḷattu uḷoḷi ciṟanta         18-70
       muttukkūrt taṉṉa muḷeyiṟṟu amutam
       aruntē mānta āruyir taḷirppa
       viruntiṉ mūral arumpiya tūum
       māitaḻk kuvaḷai malarpuṟattu ōṭṭik
       kāyvēl veṉṟa karuṅkayal neṭuṅkaṇ
       aṟivupiṟitu ākiyatu āyiḻai taṉakkueṉac
       ceviyakam pukūuc ceṉṟa cevviyum,
       paḷiṅkupuṟattu eṟinta pavaḷap pāvaieṉ
       uḷaṅkoṇṭu oḷittāḷ uyirkkāp piṭṭueṉṟu
       iṭaiyiruḷ yāmattu iruntēṉ muṉṉarp         18-80
       poṉtikaḻ mēṉi orutti tōṉṟic
       ceṅkōl kāṭṭic ceytavam purinta
       aṅkuavaḷ taṉtiṟam ayarppāy eṉṟaṉaḷ
       teyvam kollō tippiyam kollō
       eyyā maiyalēṉ yāṉeṉṟu avaṉcola,
       cittirā patitāṉ ciṟunakai eyti
       attiṟam viṭuvāy araciḷaṅ kuricil
       kāmak kaḷḷāṭṭu iṭaimayak kuṟṟaṉa
       tēvark kāyiṉum cilavō ceppiṉ,
       mātavaṉ maṭantaikku varuntutuyar eyti         18-90
       āyiram ceṅkaṇ amararkōṉ peṟṟatum,
       mēruk kuṉṟattu ūrunīrc caravaṇattu
       aruntiṟal muṉivarkku āraṇaṅku ākiya
       perumpeyarp peṇṭir piṉpuuḷam pōkkiya
       aṅki maṉaiyāḷ avaravar vaṭivāyt
       taṅkā vēṭkai taṉaiavaḷ taṇittatūum
       kēṭṭum aṟitiyō vāḷtiṟal kuricil urai
       kaṉṉik kāvalum kaṭiyiṉ kāvalum
       taṉuṟu kaṇavaṉ cāvuṟiṉ kāvalum
       niṟaiyiṉ kāttup piṟarpiṟark kāṇātu         18-100
       koṇṭōṉ allatu teyvamum pēṇāp
       peṇṭirtam kuṭiyil piṟantāḷ allaḷ urai
       nāṭavar kāṇa nalaraṅku ēṟi
       āṭalum pāṭalum aḻakum kāṭṭic
       curuppunāṇ karuppuvil aruppukkaṇai tūvac
       cerukkayal neṭuṅkaṇ curukkuvalaip paṭuttuk
       kaṇṭōr neñcam koṇṭuakam pukkup
       paṇtēr moḻiyiṉ payaṉpala vāṅki
       vaṇṭiṉ tuṟakkum koṇṭi makaḷiraip
       pāṉmaiyil piṇittup paṭiṟṟuurai aṭakkutal         18-110
       kōlmuṟai aṉṟō kumaraṟku eṉṟalum,
       utaya kumaraṉ uḷḷam piṟaḻntu
       viraipari neṭuntēr mēṟceṉṟu ēṟi
       āyiḻai irunta ampalam eytik
       kāṭuamar celvi kaṭippaci kaḷaiya
       ōṭukaik koṇṭuniṉṟu ūṭṭunaḷ pōlat
       tīppaci mākkaṭkuc ceḻuñcōṟu īttup
       pāttiram ēntiya pāvaiyaik kāṇṭalum,
       iṭaṅkaḻi kāmamoṭu aṭaṅkāṉ āki
       uṭampōṭu eṉtaṉ uḷḷakam pukuntueṉ         18-120
       neñcam kavarnta vañcak kaḷvi
       nōṟṟuūṇ vāḻkkaiyiṉ nocitavam tāṅki
       ēṟṟūṇ virumpiya kāraṇam eṉeṉat
       tāṉē tamiyaḷ niṉṟōḷ muṉṉar
       yāṉē kēṭṭal iyalpueṉac ceṉṟu
       nallāy eṉkol naltavam purintatu
       collāy eṉṟu tuṇintuuṭaṉ kēṭpa,
       eṉamar kātalaṉ irākulaṉ īṅkuivaṉ
       taṉaṭi toḻutalum takavueṉa vaṇaṅki
       aṟaipōy neñcam avaṉpāl aṇukiṉum         18-130
       iṟaivaḷai muṉkai īṅkuivaṉ paṟṟiṉum
       toṉṟu kātalaṉ coletir maṟuttal
       naṉṟi aṉṟueṉa naṭuṅkiṉaḷ mayaṅkik urai
       kēṭṭatu moḻivēṉ kēḷvi yāḷaril
       tōṭṭa ceviyainī ākuvai yāmeṉil
       piṟattalum mūttalum piṇippaṭṭu iraṅkalum
       iṟattalum uṭaiyatu iṭumpaik koḷkalam
       makkaḷ yākkai itueṉa uṇarntu
       mikka nalaṟam virumputal purintēṉ
       maṇṭuamar murukkum kaḷiṟuaṉai yārkkup         18-140
       peṇṭir kūṟum pēraṟivu uṇṭō
       kēṭṭaṉai āyiṉ vēṭṭatu ceykeṉa, urai
       vāḷtiṟal kurucilai maṭakkoṭi nīṅki
       muttai mutalvi mutiyāḷ irunta
       kuccarak kuṭikai taṉakam pukkuāṅku
       āṭavar ceyti aṟikunar yāreṉat
       tōṭualar kōtaiyait toḻutaṉaḷ ētti
       māya viñcai mantiram ōtik
       kāyacaṇ ṭikaieṉum kārikai vaṭivāy
       maṇimē kalaitāṉ vantu tōṉṟa         18-150
       tārōṉ avaḷpāl pukkuk
       kuccarak kuṭikaik kumariyai marīip
       piccaip pāttiram perumpaci uḻanta
       kāyacaṇ ṭikaitaṉ kaiyil kāṭṭi
       māyaiyiṉ oḷitta maṇimē kalaitaṉai
       īṅkuim maṇṇīṭṭu yāreṉa uṇarkēṉ
       āṅkuavaḷ ivaḷeṉṟu aruḷāy āyiṭiṉ
       palnā ḷāyiṉum pāṭu kiṭappēṉ
       iṉṉum kēḷāy imaiyōr pāvāy
       pavaḷac cevvāyt tavaḷavāḷ nakaiyum         18-160
       añcaṉam cērāc ceṅkayal neṭuṅkaṇum
       murintukaṭai neriya vaḷaintacilaip puruvamum
       kuvimuḷ karuviyum kōṇamum kūrnuṉaik
       kavaimuḷ karuviyum ākik kaṭikoḷak
       kalvip pākaril kāppuvalai ōṭṭi
       valvāy yāḻiṉ mellitiṉ viḷaṅka
       mutukkuṟai mutumoḻi eṭuttuk kāṭṭip
       putukkōḷ yāṉai vēṭṭam vāytteṉa
       mutiyāḷ uṉtaṉ kōṭṭam pukunta
       mativāḷ mukattu maṇimē kalaitaṉai         18-170
       oḻiyap pōkēṉ uṉaṭi toṭṭēṉ
       itukuṟai eṉṟaṉaṉ iṟaimakaṉ tāṉeṉ.
       utayakumaraṉ ampalam pukka kātai muṟṟiṟṟu.
       -----

                 Chapter 18. Chitrāpathi meets Udayakumaran
       Chitrāpathi, Mādhavi’s mother, knew that Manimekalai
       had become a bhikshuni and was upset,
       her chest burning as if wounded with a hot poker.
       She sighed, worried and thought,
       “I will stop Manimekalai from feeding people.”
       Chitrāpathi’s Vow.
       She told all the dancing girls,
       “Isn’t it a laughable matter that Mādhavi felt sad
       and entered a Buddhist monastery when Kovalan was killed? 18-010
       If anyone says it is all right to do such a thing
       in this fine, well-known place,
       that could only be a joke told by a smart person.
       We are not chaste women born in good families
       and we do not suffer when our dear ones pass away
       and enter into fire as if we were bathing in a wide pond.
       We take wealth from many, eat and live.
       We are not like the yāz of a Pānan that has no use after he has
       died.
       Besides we are like a bee that avoids fragrant flowers
       if they have no honey. 18-020
       We are like the goddess Thirumagal who deserts people
       when they do not have good karma.
       If we gave up our lives and became monks,
       people would laugh at us.
       Prince Udayakumaran, the ruler of the world,
       like a bee desiring honey
       wishes to get Mādhavi’s daughter Manimekalai
       beautiful as Lakshmi on her lotus.
       I will make the Amudhasurabhi
       that Manimekalai holds be taken by beggars
       so the prince can get her 18-030
       and bring her in his golden chariot.
       If I do not do that, won’t I be like a worker
       who is scarred from carrying bricks
       and wanders around a dancing hall?
       I will not enter the dancing hall at all.”
       Chitrāpathi goes to the palace of the Prince.
       Chitrāpathi made her vow,
       sighing so that her heart burned.
       Then, her lovely bright face sweating, 18 -040
       she walked on the roads where chariots run,
       and went to the prince’s palace,
       surrounded by beautiful women adorned with thick bracelets.
       Chitrāpathi sees the prince and talked to him.
       Udayakumaran was staying in a shining marble mandapam
       that was spread with sand
       and where bees buzzed, dripping honey.
       Its pillars were made of gold and studded with coral,
       and its roof was decorated with paintings made of shining pearls.
       There was a bright throne there made like a chariot pulled by deer,
       and pure flowers were sprinkled on it
       while women stood on both sides of the throne
       fanning with white chowries that looked like white waves.
       18-050
       Chitrāpathi went near the prince and bowed to his feet.
       He laughed showing his shining teeth and asked her,
       “Do you think it is wrong that Manimekalai,
       the daughter of Mādhavi, has become a bhikshuni?”
       Chitrāpathi smiled and said,
       “Our beautiful Kānchi city filled with kurugu birds
       that give birth to chicks is famous for its bharatanatyam.
       She is desired by people of all lands
       because she is filled with skilled dancers and actors.
       Manimekalai is like a fragrant flower that has opened
       and you, O prince, are like the bee that you drinks its honey.
       I came here swiftly to tell you this.
       You with your shining sword
       are from the dynasty of the Chola kings,
       the won the Paranthalai war.
       May your garland prosper.” 18-060
       When she had said this,
       the prince felt like a man on a sinking ship
       suddenly finding a good boat to save him. He said,
       “When I saw Manimekalai in the marble room,
       I thought she was a marble statue.
       She held her beautiful hands, like kanthal flowers,
       near her breasts, embraced and crushed them.
       Her sharp pearl-like teeth shone in her coral mouth
       that was filled with sweet nectar.
       When she smiles, it makes men happy. 18-070
       Her dark fishlike eyes conquer spears
       and defeat dark-petaled kuvalai flowers.
       Her eyes that touch her ears seem to be whispering love messages.
       She could destroy the rational thought of any man and make him
       crazy.
       I thought the coral statue in the marble room had stolen my heart,
       and when I went to bed in the middle of night it protected my life.
       In the dark night, a goddess shining like gold
       appeared before me, showed me her scepter and said,
       ‘Manimekalai has done tapas to be a bhikshuni. Do not try to have
       her.’
       I do not know whether the one in my dream was a goddess
       or just a noice from the sky, but I know that I love Manimekalai.”
       Chitrāpathi smiled and said,
       “O, young royal prince!
       Do not let those thoughts worry you. Leave them.
       I can tell you that even the gods have great difficulty
       when they fall into the play of the wine of passion. 18-090.
       Indra, the king of the gods
       was cursed to have a thousand eyes all over his body
       when he fell in love with Ahalya the wife of the sage Gauthama.
       In the Saravana pond fed by springs in the Himalayas
       the god Agni loved the seven wives of the sages
       but could not consummate his passion.
       His wife Sukhadevi took the form of six of those women,
       all except Arundhati, and made love with Agni.
       Satisfied, Agni did not desire the wives of the sages after that.
       You are a prince with a strong sword. Haven’t you heard these
       stories?
       Chaste women protect their purity when they are young.
       After their marriage, if their husband dies, they never look at any
       men. 18 -100
       They do not worship any god except their husbands.
       But Mādhavi was not born in a family of chaste women.
       Mādhavi and Manimekalai were born in a family of dasis.
       Women in those families dance and sing in halls,
       showing off their beauty
       where people from the whole country can see them.
       Kama with a sugarcane bow
       and bees swarming on his flower arrows makes men desire them.
       They attract men with their thick long fish eyes,
       and men are caught in their net.
       They steal the hearts of men at once the men see them.
       They speak with melodious voices, take all of men’s wealth,
       and then leave them like bees that leave flowers
       after taking honey from them.
       Isn’t it the duty of a king to control such women
       and stop their behavior?” 18-110
       The prince goes to the temple and sees Manimekalai.
       After hearing Chitrāpathi Udayakumaran was confused
       and drove swiftly on his tall chariot yoked to speeding horses.
       He went to the temple where the ornamented Manimekalai was staying.
       He saw her.
       She was holding a pot and feeding hungry people,
       looking like a goddess of the forest feeding the hungry.
       When the prince saw her
       he could not controlled his rising passion and thought.
       “She, a devious thief, entered my heart 18-120
       and attracted me. .
       Now she is dressed like a thin bhikshuni doing tapas and feeding
       people.
       Why she is begging and feeding them?
       Now she is standing there by herself.
       It is good time to go and tell her of my desire. ”
       The prince and Manimekalai meet.
       He went near Manimekalai and asked her bravely,
       “O beautiful one, why are you doing tapas? Tell me.”
       Manimekalai recognized that he was Rāgulan,
       her husband in her previous birth, and thought,
       “This is my dear husband Rāgulan.
       I should bow to his feet and worship him.
       He is my husband from my previous birth.
       My heart attracted to him, 18-130
       and if he holds my wrist decorated with bangles,
       it is not right for me to refuse to do what he says.”
       She shivered and, confused with love, said to him,
       “If you will listen, I will tell you what I have heard from wise
       men.
       This body gives only trouble.
       It is born, becomes old, falls into sickness and dies.
       I want and have decided to do good dharma—
       that is the life I am leading.
       You are like a strong elephant that fights in the battle.
       Can women like me teach you what is wise to do?
       Now that you have heard what I have to say,
       you can do whatever you please.” 18-140
       Manimekalai, beautiful as a vine, left the prince
       and entered the temple of the ancient goddess.
       She thought “Who can understand how men behave?”
       She went inside the temple
       and praised and worshiped the goddess,
       decorated with fresh blooming flower garlands.
       Then she recited the mantra
       that the goddess Manimekalai had given her,
       took the form of Kāyasandihai
       and went out of the temple. 18-150
       The prince, adorned with a beautiful flower garland, entered the
       temple,
       went near the goddess Muthiyāl there, worshiped her
       and saw Manimekalai disguised as Kāyasandihai carrying a begging
       pot.
       He said to the goddess,
       “How can I recognize Manimekalai?
       She has disguised herself and taken another form.
       If you do not give me your grace and show me Manimekalai,
       I will come here and suffer even if it takes many days. 18-160
       Please hear me.
       You are the goddess of the gods in the sky,
       I love Manimekalai
       with her coral red mouth,
       shining pearl teeth,
       long beautiful fish eyes decorated with kohl,
       bent eyebrows like bows,
       and shining moonlike face.
       Please show her to me.18-172
       O ancient goddess Sambāpathi,
       Manimekalai with her shining moonlike face entered your temple.
       I will keep coming until you give me grace
       so I can take her with me from this temple.
       I worship your feet, and this is my vow.”
       He swore and then left the temple. 18-172
       -----------
                        _________________________________

          19. ciṟaikkōṭṭam aṟakkōṭṭam ākkiya kātai
  [ maṇimēkalai kāyacaṇṭikai vaṭivāyc ciṟaikkōṭṭampukkuc
ciṟaivīṭu ceytu ciṟaik kōṭṭam aṟakkōṭṭam ākkiya pāṭṭu ]

       mutiyāḷ tiruntu aṭi mummaiyiṉ vaṇaṅki
       matumalart tārōṉ vañciṉam kūṟa
       ēṭuaviḻ tārōy emkō makaḷmuṉa
       nāṭātu tuṇintunā nalkūrn taṉaiyeṉa
       vittakar iyaṟṟiya viḷaṅkiya kaiviṉaic
       cittiram oṉṟu teyvam kūṟalum,
       utaya kumaraṉ uḷḷam kalaṅkip
       potiyaṟaip paṭṭōr pōṉṟumey varunti
       aṅkuavaḷ taṉtiṟam ayarppāy eṉṟē
       ceṅkōl kāṭṭiya teyvamum tippiyam         19-10
       paiaravu alkul palarpaci kaḷaiyak
       kaiyil ēntiya pāttiram tippiyam
       muttai mutalvi aṭipiḻait tāyeṉaca
       cittiram uraitta itūum tippiyam
       innilai ellām iḷaṅkoṭi ceytiyiṉ
       piṉaṟi vāmeṉap peyarvōṉ taṉṉai
       akalvāy ñālam āriruḷ uṇṇap
       pakalaracu ōṭṭip paṇaieḻuntu ārppa
       mālai neṟṟi vāṉpiṟaik kōṭṭu
       nīla yāṉai mēlōr iṉṟik         19-20
       kāmar ceṅkai nīṭṭi vaṇṭupaṭu
       pūnāṟu kaṭāam cerukkik kālkiḷarntu
       niṟaiaḻi tōṟṟamoṭu toṭara muṟaimaiyiṉ
       nakara nampiyar vaḷaiyōr tammuṭaṉ
       makara vīṇaiyiṉ kiḷainarampu vaṭitta
       iḷipuṇar iṉcīr eḵkuuḷam kiḻippap
       poṟāa neñcil pukaieri pottip
       paṟāak kurukiṉ uyirttuavaṉ pōyapiṉ,
       uṟaiyuḷ kuṭikai uḷvarik koṇṭa
       maṟuil ceykai maṇimē kalaitāṉ         19-30
       mātavi makaḷāy maṉṟam tiritariṉ
       kāvalaṉ makaṉō kaiviṭa līyāṉ
       kāypaci yāṭṭi kāyacaṇ ṭikaieṉa
       ūrmuḻutu aṟiyum uruvam koṇṭē
       āṟṟā mākkaṭku āṟṟum tuṇaiyāki
       ēṟṟalum iṭutalum irappōr kaṭaṉavar
       mēṟceṉṟu aḷittal viḻuttakaittu eṉṟē
       nūṟporuḷ uṇarntōr nuṉittaṉa rāmeṉa
       mutiyāḷ kōṭṭattu akavayiṉ irunta
       amuta curapiyai aṅkaiyiṉ vāṅkip         19-40
       patiakam tiritarum paintoṭi naṅkai urai
       atirkaḻal vēntaṉ aṭipiḻait tārai
       oṟukkum taṇṭattu uṟuciṟaik kōṭṭam
       viruppoṭum pukuntu veytuuyirttup pulampi
       āṅkup paciuṟum āruyir mākkaḷai
       vāṅku kaiyakam varuntaniṉṟu ūṭṭalum,
       ūṭṭiya pāttiram oṉṟueṉa viyantu
       kōṭṭam kāvalar kōmakaṉ taṉakkuip
       pāttira tāṉamum paintoṭi ceytiyum
       yāppuṭait tāka icaittumeṉṟu ēki,         19-50
       neṭiyōṉ kuṟaḷuru vāki nimirntutaṉa
       aṭiyiṉ paṭiyai aṭakkiya annāḷ
       nīriṉ peyta mūri vārcilai
       māvali marumāṉ cīrkeḻu tirumakaḷ
       cīrtti eṉṉum tiruttaku tēviyoṭu
       pōtuaviḻ pūmpoḻil pukuntaṉaṉ pukkuk
       kompart tumpi kuḻalicai kāṭṭap
       poṅkar vaṇṭiṉam nalliyāḻ ceyya
       varikkuyil pāṭa māmayil āṭum
       viraippūm pantar kaṇṭuuḷam ciṟantum,         19-60
       puṇartuṇai nīṅkiya poykai aṉṉamoṭu
       maṭamayil pēṭaiyum tōkaiyum kūṭi
       iruciṟai virittuāṅku eḻuntuṭaṉ koṭpaṉa
       oruciṟaik kaṇṭuāṅku uḷmakiḻvu eyti
       māmaṇi vaṇṇaṉum tammuṉum piññaiyum
       āṭiya kuravaiiḵtu āmeṉa nōkkiyum,
       kōṅkualar cērnta māṅkaṉi taṉṉaip
       pāṅkuuṟa irunta palpoṟi maññaiyaica
       cempoṉ taṭṭil tīmpāl ēntip
       paiṅkiḷi ūṭṭumōr pāvaiyām eṉṟum,         19-70
       aṇimalarp pūmpoḻil akavayiṉ irunta
       piṇavukkuraṅku ēṟṟip perumatar maḻaikkaṇ
       maṭavōrkku iyaṟṟiya māmaṇi ūcal
       kaṭuvaṉ ūk kuvatu kaṇṭunakai eytiyum,
       pācilai ceṟinta pacuṅkāl kaḻaiyoṭu
       vālvīc ceṟinta marāam kaṇṭu
       neṭiyōṉ muṉṉoṭu niṉṟaṉa ṉāmeṉat
       toṭicēr ceṅkaiyil toḻutuniṉṟu ēttiyuma
       āṭal kūttiṉōṭu avinayam terivōr
       nāṭakak kāppiya nalnūl nuṉippōr         19-80
       paṇṇiyāḻ narampil paṇṇumuṟai niṟuppōr
       taṇṇumaik karuvik kaṇeṟi terivōr
       kuḻaloṭu kaṇṭam koḷaccīr niṟuppōr
       paḻuniya pāṭal palaroṭu makiḻvōr
       āram parinta muttam kōppōr
       īram pularnta cāntam timirvōr
       kuṅkuma varuṇam koṅkaiyiṉ iḻaippōr
       añceṅ kaḻunīr āyitaḻ piṇippōr
       nalneṭuṅ kūntal naṟuvirai kuṭaivōr
       poṉṉiṉ āṭiyiṉ poruntupu niṟpōr         19-90
       āṅkuavar tammōṭu akaliru vāṉattu
       vēntaṉiṟ ceṉṟu viḷaiyāṭṭu ayarntu,
       kuruntum taḷavum tiruntumalarc ceruntiyum
       murukuviri mullaiyum karuviḷam poṅkarum
       poruntupu niṉṟu tiruntunakai ceytu
       kuṟuṅkāl nakulamum neṭuñcevi muyalum
       piṟaḻntupāy māṉum iṟumpuakalā veṟiyum
       vammeṉak kūuy makiḻtuṇai yoṭutaṉ
       cemmalarc ceṅkai kāṭṭupu niṉṟu urai
       maṉṉavaṉ tāṉum malarkkaṇai maintaṉum         19-100
       iṉiḷa vēṉilum iḷaṅkāl celvaṉum
       entirak kiṇaṟum iṭuṅkal kuṉṟamum
       vantuvīḻ aruviyum malarppūm pantarum
       parappunīrp poykaiyum karappunīrk kēṇiyum
       oḷittuṟai iṭaṅkaḷum paḷikkuaṟaip paḷḷiyum
       yāṅkaṇum tirintu tāḻntuviḷai yāṭi,
       makata viṉaiñarum marāṭṭak kammarum
       avantik kollarum yavaṉat taccarum
       taṇtamiḻ viṉaiñar tammoṭu kūṭik
       koṇṭuiṉitu iyaṟṟiya kaṇkavar ceyviṉaip         19-110
       pavaḷat tiraḷkāl paṉmaṇip pōtikait
       tavaḷa nittilat tāmam tāḻnta
       kōṇac canti māṇviṉai vitāṉattut
       tamaṉiyam vēynta vakaipeṟu vaṉappiṉ
       paiñcēṟu meḻukāp pacumpoṉ maṇṭapattu
       intira tiruvaṉ ceṉṟuiṉitu ēṟalum, urai
       vāyilukku icaittu maṉṉavaṉ aruḷāl
       cēynilattu aṉṟiyum cevvitiṉ vaṇaṅki
       eñcā maṇnacaii ikaluḷam turappa
       vañciyiṉ iruntu vañci cūṭi         19-120
       muṟamcevi yāṉaiyum tērum māvuma
       maṟamkeḻu neṭuvāḷ vayavarum miṭainta
       talaittārc cēṉaiyoṭu malaittuttalai vantōra
       cilaikkayal neṭuṅkoṭi ceruvēl taṭakkai
       ārpuṉai teriyal iḷaṅkōṉ taṉṉāl
       kāriyāṟṟuk koṇṭa kāval veṇkuṭai
       valikeḻu taṭakkai māvaṇ kiḷḷi
       oḷiyoṭu vāḻi ūḻitōṟu ūḻi
       vāḻi emkō maṉṉavar peruntakai
       kēḷitu maṉṉō keṭukaniṉ pakaiñar         19-130
       yāṉait tīnōykku ayarntumey vāṭiim
       mānakart tiriyumōr vampa mātar
       aruñciṟaik kōṭṭattu akavayiṉ pukuntu
       perumpeyar maṉṉa niṉpeyar vāḻtti
       aiyap pāttiram oṉṟukoṇṭu āṅku
       moykoḷ mākkaḷ mocikkaūṇ curantaṉaḷ
       ūḻitōṟu ūḻi ulakam kāttu
       vāḻi emkō maṉṉava eṉṟalum,
       varuka varuka maṭakkoṭi tāṉeṉṟu
       aruḷpuri neñcamoṭu aracaṉ kūṟaliṉ         19-140
       vāyi lāḷariṉ maṭakkoṭi tāṉceṉṟu
       āykaḻal vēntaṉ aruḷvā ḻiyaeṉat
       tāṅkuarun taṉmait tavattōy nīyār
       yāṅkā kiyatuiv ēntiya kaṭiñaieṉṟu
       aracaṉ kūṟalum, āyiḻai yuraikkum
       viraittār vēntē nīnīṭu vāḻi
       viñcai makaḷyāṉ viḻavuaṇi mūtūra
       vañcam tirintēṉ vāḻiya peruntakai
       vāṉam vāykka maṇvaḷam perukuka
       tītuiṉ ṟāka kōmakaṟku īṅkuītu         19-150
       aiyak kaṭiñai ampalam maruṅkuōr
       teyvam tantatu tippiya māyatu
       yāṉait tīnōy arumpaci keṭuttatu
       ūṉuṭai mākkaṭku uyirmaruntu itueṉa,
       yāṉceyaṟ pālatueṉ iḷaṅkoṭikku eṉṟu
       vēntaṉ kūṟa meliyal uraikkum
       ciṟaiyōr kōṭṭam cīttuaruḷ neñcattu
       aṟavōrkku ākkum atuvā ḻiyareṉa, urai
       aruñciṟai viṭṭuāṅku āyiḻai uraitta
       peruntavar tammāl perumporuḷ eytak         19-160
       kaṟaiyōr illāc ciṟaiyōr kōṭṭam
       aṟavōrkku ākkiṉaṉ aracuāḷ vēntueṉ.
       ciṟaikkōṭṭam aṟakkōṭṭam ākkiya kātai muṟṟiṟṟu.
       -----------

            Chapter 19. The king changes the prison to a choultry
       The prince adorned with a honey-dripping garland
       made this vow in front of the goddess Muthiyāl,
       and the statue of the goddess in the temple
       made by a skilled sculptor said,
       “O prince, adorned with a garland
       made of blossoming flowers,
       you made your vow without thinking.
       That vow, made with your tongue, cannot be fulfilled.”
       Upon hearing the words of the goddess,
       Udayakumaran was worried and suffered
       as if he were caught in a dark windowless room.
       He thought “It is true that the goddess told me to forget
       Manimekalai. 19-010
       It is true that Manimekalai carries a pot
       and feeds people to appease their hunger.
       It is true that the statue of the goddess told me
       that I have not fulfilled what she said.
       I will try to discover the condition of young Manimekalai,
       lovely as a vine, later.”
       Then he left the temple.
       The morning
       The Sun, the king of day, rose, chasing away
       the darkness that filled the earth.
       The sound of the morning drums rose.
       The night that is like a dark elephant without a mahout, 19 -020
       opening its lovely long trunk, happily, dripping with musth,
       spreading its fragrance of flowers and swarming with bees,
       followed the prince like a wild wind.
       When the prince heard the music of the Makara veena
       his heart seemed to break.
       He could not bear it as the fire of passion burned him
       and his breathing was like a smith’s bellows. 19-030
       After the prince left that place, the faultless Manimekalai
       thought,
       “If I wander in this mandram
       the son of the king will not leave me.
       All the people here know how Kāyasandihai,
       suffering from the yānaitee sickness,
       was always hungry and wandered here.
       I will disguise myself as her and give food to poor people.
       The teaching of the learned books says,
       ‘Begging and receiving food is the karma of beggars.
       It is an virtuous thing to feed them.’”
       Manimekalai, thinking these things,
       went into the temple of Muthiyāl and received the Amudhasurabhi
       in her beautiful hands from the goddess. 19-040
       Manimekalai adorned with lovely bracelets, wandering here and
       there,
       happily entered the prison where criminals were punished.
       The prisoners sighed, suffered and cried out from hunger
       as she filled their hands with lots of food.
       When the guards of the prison saw Manimekalai,
       they were surprised and thought,
       “She has entered happily into this prison
       where criminals are punished by the king
       adorned with heroic sounding anklets.
       The prisoners here were suffering from hunger.
       and she gave them food, filling their hands and curing their
       hunger.
       She has only one pot in her hands yet she feeds many people.
       We will certainly go and tell the king
       about this ornamented woman
       and how she feeds people with her pot.” 19-050
       The king Nedungilli enters the beautiful garden with his wife, the
       queen
       Rajamādevi and enjoyed the beauty of the garden. .
       The king entered the beautiful garden
       blooming with flowers with his beautiful queen, Seerthi.
       He was a descendent of Vishnu, whose dwarf incarnation
       covered the sky and the earth with his feet.
       In the garden, bees on the branches of the trees
       buzzed like beautiful yāzs, cuckoo birds sang, 19-060
       beautiful peacocks danced, fragrant flowers spread their fragrance,
       a swan in the pond, leaving his mate,
       joined the dance of the lovely peacock that had opened its plumage.
       They looked at them in surprise and thought happily
       that the dance of the peacock and swan
       looked as if the sapphire-colored Vishnu,
       Baladeva and Nappinai were all together.
       One peacock near a mango tree covered with kongu flowers
       looked like a statue of girl carrying sweet milk
       on a pure golden plate to feed a green parrot. 19-070
       In that garden blooming with lovely flowers,
       the king laughed to see a monkey push his mate
       on a beautiful swing studded with diamonds
       made for women with large cloud-like eyes and lovely glances.
       He saw a kadamba tree blooming with white flowers
       growing next to a green bamboo tree with green leaves
       and, thinking how it resembled Krishna
       standing with his elder brother Balaraman,
       and he worshiped it, folding his hands and praising it. 19-080
       The king and the queen were surrounded with all these things.
       Dancers danced kuthu and performed abhinayam,
       the scholars of epics and plays recited,
       yāz musicians played music on their yāzs,
       drummers beat their drums,
       others played the flute, blowing air,
       and singers sang well-known songs together with many people.
       Some women strung garlands with pearls,
       some mixed sandalwood with water to make a paste,
       some smeared kungumam on their breasts,
       some made beautiful cenkazuneer flower garlands,
       some decorated their hair with fragrant oil,
       and some admired themselves in mirrors
       made of gold and stood happily. 19-090
       The king, like Indra the king of the sky, joined all these people.
       He showed his queen the garden blooming with flowers—
       kurundu, jasmine, beautiful cherundi,
       fragrant mullai and karuvilam pongar.
       He stood near the animals, smiling
       and showing the queen the small-legged mongooses,
       long-eared rabbits, galloping deer,
       and goats that never leave the small forest.
       He named all the animals
       and showed them to his happy queen. 19-100
       The king and Kama, carrier of flower arrows,
       wandered together in the sweet breezes of the young spring
       exploring all places and playing.
       They saw wells with machines bringing up water for crops,
       waterfalls descending from small hills,
       beautiful pandals filled with flowers,
       ponds filled to the top with water,
       and wells so deep the water in them could not be seen.
       There were places to play hide-and-seek and marble rooms.
       The beautiful mandapam where the king stayed
       Goldsmiths from the Magada country,
       smiths from the Marātta land,
       iron smiths from Avandinādu,
       and carpenters from Yavanam,
       had all joined together with the workers in lovely Tamil Nadu,
       and made a mandapam for the king. 19-110
       In that golden mandapam,
       the pillars were studded with corals that delighted the eyes of
       all.
       From its fine golden roof, pearl and coral garlands hung.
       As if he were Indra, the king entered his precious golden mandapam
       and sat on the throne.
       The guards of the palace come with Manimekalai disguised as
       Kāyasandihai and see the king.
       The guards of the palace came before the king, bowed to him and
       said,
       “O king, you are the conquerer of your enemies,
       You are the king of Vanji, adorned with a vanji garland.
       You have an army of heroic elephants with ears like winnowing fans,
       of chariots, of horses and of soldiers wearing heroic garlands.
       Your younger brother, Killi, reigning under his white parasol,
       conquered the land on the banks of Kāri river
       and defeated the enemy Pandiyans.
       O Chola king Killi, you are generous,
       and you wear an atthi garland.
       May you, our king, live long
       and may your enemies perish. 19-130
       Hear this, O famous king!
       A strange woman with a begging pot,
       wandering thin and tired in this city,
       has entered the guarded prison.
       Praising your fame and carrying a begging pot,
       she gives food to all hungry people. 19-140
       O king, may you prosper
       and protect this world for many eons.”
       The king said to Manimekalai with compassion,
       “O beautiful vine-like woman, come.”
       Manimekalai, beautiful as a vine,
       approached the king, moving away from the guards, and said,
       “May you, our famous king adorned with anklets, prosper!”
       The king asked,
       “You seem an auspicious holy person. Who are you?
       Where did you get this begging pot?”
       Manimekalai, adorned with precious jewelry, answered,
       “O king with fragrant garlands,
       may you prosper for a long time!
       I am an apsaras from the sky
       and wander here because of the cruelty of the queen.
       O great one, may you prosper!
       May the sky pour rain!
       May the earth flourish!
       May no evil befall you!
       This begging pot was given me by the goddess in the temple. 19-150
       It is a divine pot and cures the yānaittee sickness.
       It is a remedy that gives life to hungry people.”
       The king asked,
       “What can I do for you, O young one like a vine?”
       Manimekalai said softly,
       “Change the prison to an ashram where compassionate sages
       can live and search for divine things.
       May you prosper!”
       The ruler of the country closed the prison and made it into an
       ashram
       where sages could live in this world and search for divine things.
       19-162
       ----------
                           __________________________

               20. utayakumaraṉai vāḷāl eṟinta kātai
[ maṇimēkalai, kāyacaṇṭikaivaṭivueytak kāyacaṇṭikai kaṇavaṉākiya
kāñcaṉaṉeṉṉum viccātaraṉ vantu kāyacaṇṭikaiyām eṉakkaruta
       avaḷ piṉṉilaiviṭā utayakumaraṉaip putaiyiruṭkaṇ
            ulakaaṟaviyil vāḷāleṟintupōṉa pāṭṭu ]

       aracaṉ āṇaiyiṉ āyiḻai aruḷāl
       nirayak koṭuñciṟai nīkkiya kōṭṭam
       tīppiṟappu uḻantōr ceyviṉaip payattāṉ
       yāppuuṭai naṟpiṟappu eytiṉar pōlap
       poruḷpuri neñcil pulavōṉ kōyilum
       aruḷpuri neñcattu aṟavōr paḷḷiyum
       aṭṭil cālaiyum aruntunar cālaiyum
       kaṭṭuuṭaic celvak kāppuuṭait tāka,
       āyiḻai ceṉṟatūum āṅkuavaḷ taṉakku
       vīyā viḻuccīr vēntaṉ paṇittatūum         20-10
       ciṟaiyōr kōṭṭam cīttuaruḷ neñcattu
       aṟavōr kōṭṭam ākkiya vaṇṇamum
       kēṭṭaṉaṉ ākiat tōṭṭār kuḻaliyai
       matiyōr eḷḷiṉum maṉṉavaṉ kāyiṉum
       potiyil nīṅkiya poḻutil ceṉṟu
       paṟṟiṉaṉ koṇṭueṉ poṉtēr ēṟṟik
       kaṟṟuaṟi viccaiyum kēṭṭuavaḷ uraikkum
       mutukkuṟai mutumoḻi kēṭkuvaṉ eṉṟē
       matukkamaḻ tārōṉ maṉamkoṇṭu eḻuntu
       palarpaci kaḷaiyap pāvaitāṉ otuṅkiya         20-20
       ulaka aṟaviyiṉ ūṭuceṉṟu ēṟalum,
       maḻaicūḻ kuṭumip potiyil kuṉṟattuk
       kaḻaivaḷar kāṉyāṟṟup paḻaviṉaip payattāl
       mātavaṉ mātarkku iṭṭa cāpam
       īrāṟu āṇṭu vantatu vārāḷ
       kāyacaṇ ṭikaieṉak kaiyaṟavu eytik
       kāñcaṉaṉ eṉṉum avaḷtaṉ kaṇavaṉ
       ōṅkiya mūtūr uḷvantu iḻintu
       pūta catukkamum pūmarac cōlaiyum
       mātavar iṭaṅkaḷum maṉṟamum potiyilum         20-30
       tērntaṉaṉ tirivōṉ ēntuiḷa vaṉamulai
       māntar pacinōy māṟṟak kaṇṭuāṅku,
       iṉṟuniṉ kaiyiṉ ēntiya pāttiram
       oṉṟē āyiṉum uṇpōr palarāl
       āṉait tīnōy arumpaci kaḷaiya
       vāṉa vāḻkkaiyar aruḷiṉar koleṉap
       paḻaimaik kaṭṭurai palapā rāṭṭavum,
       viḻaiyā uḷḷamoṭu avaṉpāl nīṅki
       utaya kumaraṉ taṉpāl ceṉṟu urai
       naraimū tāṭṭi oruttiyaik kāṭṭit         20-40
       taṇaṟal vaṇṇam tirintuvē ṟāki
       veṇmaṇal ākiya kūntal kāṇāy
       piṟainutal vaṇṇam kāṇā yōnī
       naraimaiyil tiraitōl takaiiṉṟu āyatu
       viṟalvil puruvam ivaiyum kāṇāy
       iṟaviṉ uṇaṅkal pōṉṟuvē ṟāyiṉa
       kaḻunīrk kaṇkāṇ vaḻunīr cumantaṉa
       kumiḻmūkku ivaikāṇ umiḻcī oḻukkuva
       niraimuttu aṉaiya nakaiyum kāṇāy
       curaivittu ēyppap piṟaḻntuvēṟu āyiṉa         20-50
       ilavuitaḻc cevvāy kāṇā yōnī
       pulavup puṇpōl pulālpuṟat tiṭuvatu
       vaḷḷait tāḷpōl vaṭikātu ivaikāṇ
       uḷūṉ vāṭiya uṇaṅkal pōṉṟaṉa
       iṟumpūtu cāṉṟa mulaiyum kāṇāy
       veṟumpai pōla vīḻntuvēṟu āyiṉa
       tāḻntuoci teṅkiṉ maṭalpōl tiraṅki
       vīḻntaṉa iḷavēyt tōḷum kāṇāy
       narampoṭu viṭutōl ukirttoṭar kaḻaṉṟu
       tiraṅkiya viralkaḷ ivaiyum kāṇāy         20-60
       vāḻait taṇṭē pōṉṟa kuṟaṅkuiṇai
       tāḻait taṇṭiṉ uṇaṅkal kāṇāy
       āvak kaṇaikkāl kāṇā yōnī
       mēviya narampōṭu eṉpupuṟam kāṭṭuva
       taḷiraṭi vaṇṇam kāṇā yōnī
       muḷimutir teṅkiṉ utirkāy uṇaṅkal
       pūviṉum cāntiṉum pulālmaṟaittu yāttuta
       tūciṉum maṇiyiṉum tollōr vakutta
       vañcam teriyāy maṉṉavaṉ makaṉeṉa
       viñcai makaḷāy meliyal uraittalum,         20-70
       taṉpā rāṭṭumeṉ colpayaṉ koḷḷāḷ
       piṟaṉpiṉ cellum piṟaṉpōl nōkkum
       matukkamaḻ alaṅkal maṉṉavaṉ makaṟku
       mutukkuṟai mutumoḻi eṭuttuk kāṭṭip
       pavaḷak kaṭikaiyil tavaḷavāḷ nakaiyum
       kuvaḷaic ceṅkaṇum kuṟippoṭu vaḻāaḷ
       īṅkuivaṉ kātalaṉ ātaliṉ ēntuiḻai
       īṅkuoḻin taṉaḷeṉa ikaleri potti
       maṟṟuavaḷ irunta maṉṟap potiyiluḷ
       puṟṟuaṭaṅku araviṉ pukkuoḷittu aṭaṅkiṉaṉ         20-80
       kāñcaṉaṉ eṉṉum katirvāḷ viñcaiyaṉ,
       āṅkuavaḷ uraitta araciḷaṅ kumaraṉum
       kaḷaiyā vēṭkai kaiutirk koḷḷāṉ
       vaḷaicēr ceṅkai maṇimē kalaiyē
       kāyacaṇ ṭikaiyāyk kaṭiñai ēnti
       māya viñcaiyiṉ maṉammayak kuṟuttaṉaḷ
       ampala maruṅkil ayarntuaṟivu uraittaiv
       vampalaṉ taṉṉoṭuiv vaikuiruḷ oḻiyāḷ
       iṅkuivaḷ ceyti iṭaiiruḷ yāmattu
       vantuaṟi kuvameṉa maṉamkoṇṭu eḻuntu         20-90
       vāṉtērp pākaṉai mīṉtikaḻ koṭiyaṉaik
       karuppu villiyai aruppukkaṇai maintaṉai
       uyāvut tuṇaiyāka vayāvoṭum pōki,
       ūrtuñcu yāmattu orutaṉi eḻuntu
       vēḻam vēṭṭueḻum vempuli pōlak
       kōyil kaḻintu vāyil nīṅki
       āyiḻai irunta ampalam aṇaintu
       vēka ventī nākam kiṭanta
       pōkuuyar puṟṟuaḷai pukuvāṉ pōla
       ākam tōynta cāntualar uṟutta         20-100
       ūḻaṭi iṭṭuataṉ uḷakam pukutalum
       āṅkumuṉ irunta alartār viñcaiyaṉ
       īṅkuivaṉ vantaṉaṉ ivaḷpāl eṉṟē
       veñciṉa aravam nañcueyiṟu arumpat
       taṉperu vekuḷiyiṉ eḻuntupai viritteṉa
       iruntōṉ eḻuntu perumpiṉ ceṉṟuavaṉ
       curumpuaṟai maṇittōḷ tuṇiya vīcik
       kāyacaṇ ṭikaiyaik kaikkoṇṭu antaram
       pōkuval eṉṟē avaḷpāl pukutalum,
       neṭunilaik kantiṉ iṭavayiṉ viḷaṅkak         20-110
       kaṭavuḷ eḻutiya pāvaiāṅku uraikkum:
       aṇukal aṇukal viñcaik kāñcaṉa
       maṇimē kalaiavaḷ maṟaintuuru eytiṉaḷ,
       kāyacaṇ ṭikaitaṉ kaṭumpaci nīṅki
       vāṉam pōvuḻi vantatu kēḷāy
       antaram celvōr antari irunta
       vinta mālvarai mīmicaip pōkār
       pōvār uḷareṉil poṅkiya ciṉattaḷ
       cāyaiyiṉ vāṅkit taṉvayiṟṟu iṭūum
       vintam kākkum vintā kaṭikai         20-120
       ammalai micaippōy avaḷvayiṟṟu aṭaṅkiṉaḷ.
       kaimmai koḷḷēl kāñcaṉa itukēḷ:
       ūḻviṉai vantuiṅku utaya kumaraṉai
       āruyir uṇṭa tāyiṉum aṟiyāy
       vevviṉai ceytāy viñcaik kāñcaṉa!
       avviṉai niṉṉaiyum akalātu āṅkuuṟum
       eṉṟuivai teyvam kūṟalum eḻuntu
       kaṉṟiya neñciṉ cuṭuviṉai uruttueḻa
       viñcaiyaṉ pōyiṉaṉ vilaṅkuviṇ paṭarntueṉa.         20-129
       utayakumaraṉai vāḷāl eṟintakātai muṟṟiṟṟu.
       -------------

                   Chapter 20. Udayakumaran and Kānchanan
       Udayakumaran heard that Manimekalai asked
       the famous king to change the prison into an ashram
       where the poor and sages could stay
       and that the king also built a temple for the Buddha
       where poor people could come and live.
       The prison was changed into a place
       where people with good karma could live a good life.
       It became an ashram where pious sages cooked food in the kitchen
       and fed hungry people, 20-010
       and it became a flourishing place and gave happiness to all.
       The prince goes to see Manimekalai
       The prince heard all that the king had done
       after hearing Manimekalai’s request.
       He thought, “Even if the king becomes angry with me
       and wise people hate me,
       I will go when she comes out of the temple,
       put her on my golden chariot and bring her here.
       I will hear from her all that she has learned
       and listen to her wise thoughts.”
       The prince adorned with a fragrant garland dripping with honey
       went to the Ulaga Aravi temple
       where Manimekalai, lovely as a statue, was feeding the poor. 20-020
       Kānchanan and Manimekalai disguised as Kāyasandihai
       Kānchanan the Apsaras, the husband of Kāyasandihai,
       came from the sky to the temple to find her.
       He thought, “It has been twelve years
       since the sage cursed Kāyasandihai
       on the bank of the forest river where bamboos grow
       by the cloud-covered mountain, but she has not come.”
       Kānchanan, concerned for Kāyasandihai,
       came from the sky and arrived in the famous city.
       He searched everywhere for her— 20-030
       in the Buddhachadukam, in groves with flowering trees,
       and in ashrams where the sages live, mandrams and temples.
       He saw Manimekalai with lovely young breasts
       disguised as Kāyasandihai feeding the poor.
       He saw how even though she carried only one pot,
       many hungry people received food from it.
       He thought, “Did the gods in the sky give their grace to her
       so that her yānaithee sickness is cured?”
       He came near Manimekalai lovingly,
       thinking she was his wife,
       and spoke to her about their years of love and praised her. 20-040
       She did not like what he said.
       She went near Udayakumaran,
       showed him an old lady with grey hair and said,
       “See, her hair that was colored like black sand has changed
       to the color of white sand.
       See, her forehead that was like a crescent moon is wrinkled.
       See how her eyebrows that were shaped like bows and attracted
       others
       have changed to resemble dried fish.
       Her eyes that were like kazunir flowers are now filled with impure
       water,
       Her nose that was like a kumiz flower drips with water.
       Her teeth that were like pearls now look like surai seeds. 20-050
       Her red lips that were like flower petals are dried and smell like
       meat when she smiles.
       Her lovely ears that were once like vallai flowers look like dried
       meat.
       Her ample breasts have grown flaccid and look like empty bags.
       Her arms that were once supple as bamboo
       have become like branches of a palm tree, bending and falling.
       Her fingers have become thin with shrunken skin,
       her nails are falling off. 20-060
       Her thighs that were like plantain trunks
       have grown thin and look like dried-up screwpine bushes.
       Her knees and back are fleshless, showing her nerves and bones.
       Her feet look like dried coconuts.
       O prince, you do not realize how this disgusting body
       can be covered with flowers and sandal fragrance
       and decorated with clothes and ornaments.
       This is what an ornamented body really is
       and the nature of the body when it becomes old.
       You do not know this, O innocent prince.”
       In this way, Manimekalai, disguised as the apsaras Kāyasandihai,
       told the prince what happens to the body when it ages. 20-070
       Kānchanan, seeing Manimekalai talking to the prince
       and thinking she was his wife, thought,
       “She pays no attention to me when I praise her.
       but follows another man and looks at me as if I were a stranger.
       She gave wise advice to the son of the king
       adorned with garlands dripping with honey.
       She smiles at him with her shining teeth and coral lips.
       She looks at him lovingly with her eyes that are like kuvalai
       blossoms.
       He must be her lover and she, decorated with ornaments,
       must be living with him.”
       Kānchanan’s anger burned like fire.
       With a shining sword he entered the temple where Manimekalai was
       and concealed himself like a snake in a hole. 20-080
       The prince Udayakumaran listened to what Manemekalai said
       but did not stop loving her.
       He thought the braceleted Manimekalai
       was disguised as the apsaras Kāyasandihai carrying a begging pot
       to attract Kānchanan with her magic.
       Udayakumaran thought, “She may come here in the night
       to see that stranger near the temple.
       I will come in the dark, in the middle of the night,
       to see what she is doing.”
       Then Udayakumaran left that place. 20-090
       In the middle of the night when all were sleeping,
       the prince went alone like a cruel tiger hunting an elephant.
       He went to the temple, taking as his friend Kama
       who rides a chariot in the sky
       and carries a bright fish banner,
       a sugarcane bow and flower arrows.
       He crossed the entrance of the temple
       and reached the place where the jeweled Manimekalai stayed.
       He was like a snake burning in fire trying to enter a large pit..
       He entered as the sandal paste on his chest dried.
       His fate made him enter the temple. 20-100
       When he entered the temple,
       the garlanded Kānchanan was there.
       Kānchanan thought, “This fellow has come here to get my wife.”
       Like an angry cobra opening its hood,
       he rose, went behind the prince,
       threw his sword and cut off the arms of the handsome prince
       that had garlands swarming with bees.
       Kanthil Pāvai speaks to Kānchanan
       He thought that he would take Kāyasandihai
       to his place in the sky, but when he went near her
       the statue on the pillar, the Kanthil Pāvai, told him, 20 -110
       “O Kānchanan from the sky,
       do not go near her, do not go near her.
       She is Manimekalai disguised as Kāyasandihai.
       Hear me. It is the time for Kāyasandihai’s hunger to be removed
       and for her to come to the sky world with you.
       Sky dwellers like you should not go through the Vindhya mountain
       where the goddess Andari stays.
       If they try to go that way,
       she, the goddess, the guardian of the Vindhya mountain,
       will become angry and swallow them.
       Do not worry Kānchanan, hear me.
       It was the fate of Udayakumaran that took his life here.
       Even though you do not know that it was his fate,
       you have done a cruel deed
       and the result of your act will come to you.”
       The Vinjayan Kānchanan rose feeling sorry for his deed
       and went to his place in the sky. 20-129
       -----------

                      Part 5. The Queen and Manimekalai
                 21. kantiṟpāvai varuvatu uraitta kātai
            [ maṇimēkalai utayakumaraṉ maṭintatukaṇṭu
           uṟutuyar eyta, neṭunilaikkantiṉ niṉṟa pāvai
            varuvatu uraittu avaḷ mayakku oḻitta pāṭṭu ]

       kaṭavuḷ eḻutiya neṭunilaik kantiṉ
       kuṭavayiṉ amaitta neṭunilai vāyil
       mutiyāḷ kōṭṭattu akavayiṉ kiṭanta
       matumalark kuḻali mayaṅkiṉaḷ eḻuntu urai
       viñcaiyaṉ ceytiyum veṉvēl vēntaṉ
       maintaṟku uṟṟatum maṉṟap potiyil
       kantuuṭai neṭunilaik kaṭavuḷ pāvai
       aṅkuavaṟku uraitta aṟputak kiḷaviyum
       kēṭṭaṉaḷ eḻuntu keṭukaiv urueṉat
       tōṭṭalark kuḻali uḷvari nīṅkit,         21-10
       tiṭṭi viṭamuṇa niṉuyir pōmnāḷ
       kaṭṭaḻal īmattu eṉuyir cuṭṭēṉ
       uvavaṉam maruṅkil niṉpāl uḷḷam
       tavirvuilēṉ ātaliṉ talaimakaḷ tōṉṟi
       maṇipal lavattiṭai eṉṉaiāṅku uyttup
       piṇippuaṟu mātavaṉ pīṭikai kāṭṭi
       eṉpiṟappu uṇarnta eṉmuṉ tōṉṟi
       uṉpiṟappu ellām oḻivuiṉṟu uraittaliṉ
       piṟantōr iṟattalum iṟantōr piṟattalum
       aṟantaru cālpum maṟamtaru tuṉpamum         21-20
       yāṉniṉakku uraittuniṉ iṭarviṉai oḻikkak
       kāyacaṇ ṭikaivaṭivu āṉēṉ kātala!
       vaivāḷ viñcaiyaṉ mayakkuuṟu vekuḷiyiṉ
       vevviṉai uruppa viḷintaṉai yōeṉa
       viḻumak kiḷaviyiṉ veytuuyirttup pulampi
       aḻutaṉaḷ ēṅki ayāuyirttu eḻutalum,
       cellal cellal cēyari neṭuṅkaṇ
       alliam tārōṉ taṉpāl cellal
       niṉakkuivaṉ makaṉāt tōṉṟiya tūum
       maṉakkuiṉi yāṟkunī makaḷā yatūum         21-30
       paṇṭum paṇṭum palpiṟappu uḷavāl
       kaṇṭa piṟaviyē alla kārikai
       taṭumāṟu piṟavit tāḻtaru tōṟṟam
       viṭumāṟu muyalvōy viḻumam koḷḷēl
       eṉṟuivai colli irunteyvam uraittalum
       poṉtikaḻ mēṉip pūṅkoṭi poruntip
       poyyā nāvoṭuip potiyilil poruntiya
       teyvam nīyō tiruvaṭi toḻutēṉ
       viṭṭa piṟappiṉ veytuyirttu īṅkuivaṉ
       tiṭṭi viṭamuṇac celuyir pōyatum,         21-40
       neñcu naṭuṅki neṭuntuyar kūrayāṉ
       viñcaiyaṉ vāḷiṉ ivaṉviḷin tatūum
       aṟitalum aṟitiyō aṟintaṉai āyiṉ
       peṟuvēṉ tillaniṉ pēraruḷ īṅkueṉa,
       aiari neṭuṅkaṇ āyiḻai kēḷeṉat
       teyvak kiḷaviyil teyvam kūṟum:
       kāyaṅ karaieṉum pēriyāṟṟu aṭaikarai
       māyamil mātavaṉ varuporuḷ uraittu
       maruḷuṭai mākkaḷ maṉamācu kaḻūum
       pirama tarumaṉaip pēṇiṉir āki         21-50
       aṭicil ciṟappuyām aṭikaḷukku ākkutal
       viṭiyal vēlai vēṇṭiṉam eṉṟalum
       mālai nīṅka maṉamakiḻvu eytik
       kālai tōṉṟa vēlaiyiṉ varūu
       naṭaittiṟattu iḻukki nalaṭi taḷarntu
       maṭaikkalam citaiya vīḻnta maṭaiyaṉaic
       cīlam nīṅkāc ceytavat tōrkku
       vēlai piḻaitta vekuḷi tōṉṟat
       tōḷum talaiyum tuṇintuvēṟu āka
       vāḷil tappiya valviṉai aṉṟē         21-60
       kūntal meliyal niṉṉōṭu
       irākulaṉ taṉṉai iṭṭuaka lātatu
       talaivaṉ kākkum tamporuṭṭu ākiya
       avala vevviṉai eṉpōr aṟiyār
       aṟañcey kātal aṉpiṉiṉ āyiṉum
       maṟamcey tuḷatueṉiṉ valviṉai oḻiyātu
       āṅkuav viṉaivantu aṇukum kālait
       tīṅkuuṟum uyirē ceyviṉai maruṅkiṉ
       mīṇṭuvaru piṟappiṉ mīḷiṉum mīḷuma
       āṅkuav viṉaikāṇ āyiḻai kaṇavaṉai         21-70
       īṅku vantuiv iṭarceytu oḻintatu.
       iṉṉum kēḷāy iḷaṅkoṭi nallāy
       maṉṉavaṉ makaṟku varuntutuyar eyti
       mātavar uṇarttiya vāymoḻi kēṭṭuk
       kāvalaṉ niṉṉaiyum kāvalceytu āṅkiṭum,
       iṭuciṟai nīkki irācamā tēvi
       kūṭa vaikkum koṭpiṉaḷ āki
       mātavi mātavaṉ malaraṭi vaṇaṅkit
       tītu kūṟaavaḷ taṉṉoṭum cērntu
       mātavaṉ uraitta vāymoḻi kēṭṭuk         21-80
       kātali niṉṉaiyum kāval nīkkuvaḷ
       aracuāḷ celvattu āput tiraṉpāl
       puraiyōrp pēṇip pōkalum pōkuvai
       pōṉāl avaṉoṭum poruḷurai porunti
       mānīr vaṅkattu avaṉoṭum eḻuntu
       māyamil ceyti maṇipal lavameṉum
       tīvakattu iṉṉum cēṟalum uṇṭāl
       tīva tilakaiyiṉ taṉtiṟam kēṭṭuc
       cāvaka maṉṉaṉ taṉnāṭu aṭaintapiṉ
       āṅkuat tīvamviṭṭu aruntavaṉ vaṭivāyp         21-90
       pūṅkoṭi vañci mānakar pukuvai;
       āṅkuan nakarattu aṟiporuḷ viṉāvum
       ōṅkiya kēḷvi uyarntōr palarāl
       iṟaivaṉ emkōṉ evvuyir aṉaittum
       muṟaimaiyil paṭaitta mutalvaṉeṉ pōrkaḷum,
       taṉuru illōṉ piṟaurup paṭaippōṉ
       aṉṉōṉ iṟaivaṉ ākumeṉ pōrkaḷum,
       tuṉpa nōṉpuit toṭarppāṭu aṟuttuāṅku
       iṉpaulaku ucci iruttumeṉ pōrkaḷum,
       pūta vikārap puṇarppueṉ pōrkaḷum         21-100
       palvēṟu camayap paṭiṟṟuurai ellām
       alliam kōtai kēṭkuṟum annāḷ,
       iṟaivaṉum illai iṟantōr piṟavār
       aṟaṉōṭu eṉṉaieṉṟu aṟaintōṉ taṉṉaip
       piṟaviyum aṟaviyum peṟṟiyiṉ uṇarnta
       naṟumalark kōtai eḷḷiṉai nakuti
       eḷḷiṉai pōlum ivvurai kēṭṭuiṅku
       oḷḷiyatu uraieṉa uṉpiṟappu uṇarttuvai
       āṅkuniṉ koṇarnta arunteyvam mayakkak
       kāmpueṉa tōḷi kaṉāmayakku uṟṟaṉai         21-110
       eṉṟuavaṉ uraikkum iḷaṅkoṭi nallāy
       aṉṟueṉṟu avaṉmuṉ ayarntuoḻi vāyalai;
       tīviṉai uṟutalum cettōr piṟattalum
       vāyē eṉṟu mayakkuoḻi maṭavāy!
       vaḻuvaṟu maraṉum maṇṇum kallum
       eḻutiya pāvaiyum pēcā eṉpatu
       aṟitalum aṟitiyō aṟiyāy kollō
       aṟiyāy āyiṉ āṅkuatu kēḷāy:
       muṭittuvaru ciṟappiṉ mūtūr yāṅkaṇum
       koṭittēr vītiyum tēvar kōṭṭamum         21-120
       mutumara iṭaṅkaḷum mutunīrt tuṟaikaḷum
       potiyilum maṉṟamum poruntupu nāṭik
       kāppuuṭai mānakark kāvalum kaṇṇi
       yāppuuṭait tāka aṟintōr valittu
       maṇṇiṉum kalliṉum marattiṉum cuvariṉum
       kaṇṇiya teyvatam kāṭṭunar vakukka
       āṅkuat teyvatam avviṭam nīṅkā
       ūṉkaṇi ṉārkaṭku uṟṟatai uraikkum.
       eṉtiṟam kēṭṭiyō iḷaṅkoṭi nallāy
       maṉperun teyva kaṇaṅkaḷiṉ uḷḷēṉ         21-130
       tuvatikaṉ eṉpēṉ toṉṟumutir kantiṉ
       mayaṉeṉakku oppā vakutta pāvaiyiṉ
       nīṅkēṉ yāṉeṉ nilaiyatu kēḷāy:
       māntar aṟivatu vāṉavar aṟiyār
       ōviyac cēṉaṉeṉ uṟutuṇait tōḻaṉ
       āvatai innakarkku ārurait taṉarō
       avaṉuṭaṉ yāṉceṉṟu āṭiṭam ellām
       uṭaṉuṟain tārpōl oḻiyātu eḻutip
       pūvum pukaiyum poruntupu puṇarttu
       nānaṉi varuntaeṉ nalampā rāṭṭaliṉ         21-140
       maṇimē kalaiyāṉ varuporuḷ ellām
       tuṇivuṭaṉ uraittēṉ eṉcol tēṟueṉa,
       tēṟēṉ allēṉ teyvak kiḷavikaḷ
       īṟukaṭai pōka eṉakkuaruḷ eṉṟalum,
       tuvatikaṉ uraikkum collalum colluvēṉ
       varuvatu kēḷāy: maṭakkoṭi nallāy!
       maṉuyir nīṅka maḻaivaḷam karantu
       poṉeyil kāñci nakarkaviṉ aḻiya
       āṅkuatu kēṭṭē āruyir maruntāy
       īṅkuim mutiyāḷ iṭavayiṉ vaitta         21-150
       teyvap pāttiram cevvitiṉ vāṅkit
       taiyalniṉ payantōr tammoṭu pōki
       aṟavaṇaṉ tāṉum āṅkuuḷaṉ ātaliṉ
       ceṟitoṭi kāñci mānakar cērkuvai
       aṟavaṇaṉ aruḷāl āytoṭi avvūrp
       piṟavaṇam oḻintuniṉ peṟṟiyai āki
       vaṟaṉōṭu ulakiṉ maḻaivaḷam tarūum
       aṟaṉōṭu ēnti āruyir ōmpuvai
       āytoṭikku avvūr aṟaṉoṭu tōṉṟum
       ētu nikaḻcci yāvum palauḷa         21-160
       piṟaaṟam uraittōr peṟṟimai ellām
       aṟavaṇaṉ taṉakkunī uraitta annāḷ
       tavamum tarumamum cārpil tōṟṟamum
       pavamaṟu mārkkamum pāṉmaiyiṉ uraittu
       maṟairuḷ iriya maṇuyir ēmuṟa
       aṟaveyil virittuāṅku aḷappuil iruttiyoṭu
       putta ñāyiṟu tōṉṟum kāṟum
       cettum piṟantum cemporuḷ kāvā
       ittalam nīṅkēṉ iḷaṅkoṭi yāṉum
       tāyarum nīyum tavaṟuiṉṟu āka         21-170
       vāyva tākaniṉ maṉappāṭṭu aṟameṉa
       āṅkuavaṉ uraittalum avaṉmoḻi piḻaiyāy
       pāṅkuiyal nalaṟam palavum ceytapiṉ
       kaccimuṟ ṟattu niṉuyir kaṭaikoḷa
       uttara makatattu uṟupiṟappu ellām
       āṇpiṟap pāki aruḷaṟam oḻiyāy
       māṇpoṭu tōṉṟi mayakkam kaḷaintu
       piṟarkkuaṟam aruḷum periyōṉ taṉakkut
       talaiccā vakaṉāyc cārpuaṟuttu uyti
       iṉṉum kēṭṭiyō nalnutal maṭantai         21-180
       ūṅkaṇ ōṅkiya uravōṉ taṉṉai
       vāṅkutirai eṭutta maṇimē kalāteyvam
       cātu cakkaraṟku āramutu īttōy
       ītu niṉpiṟappu eṉpatu teḷintē
       uvavaṉam maruṅkil niṉpāl tōṉṟi
       maṇipal lavattiṭaik koṇarntatu kēḷeṉat
       tuvatikaṉ uraittalum, tuyarkkaṭal nīṅki
       avati aṟinta aṇiyiḻai nallāḷ
       valaioḻi maññaiyiṉ maṉamayakku oḻitalum
       ulakutuyil eḻuppiṉaṉ malarkati rōṉeṉ.         21-190
       kantiṟpāvai varuvatu uraitta kātai muṟṟiṟṟu.
       -----------

               Chapter 21. The Kanthil Pāvai and Manimekalai
       Manimekalai weeps for Udayakumaran
       Manimekalai, her hair adorned with flowers dripping with honey,
       woke up.
       She was sleeping in the temple of the ancient goddess Mudiyal
       where a god called Kanthil Pāvai was carved on a pillar.
       Kanthil Pāvai told her what had happened to the prince
       and what Kānchanan had done to him in the temple.
       She, adorned with blooming flowers, said,
       “I remove this Kāyasandihai form!”
       and she changed into her own form. 21-010
       Manimekalai felt very sad, cried for the prince
       and spoke as if he were in front of her.
       She said, “When you were bit by a snake
       I burned myself in fire in my last birth.
       When I saw you in the flower garden, I loved you.
       At that time the goddess Manimekalai appeared
       and took me to Manipallavam.
       She showed me the Peedihai of the great sage Buddha
       and told me of my previous birth and your previous birth.
       I took the form of Kāyasandihai
       to relieve you from the pain of loving me
       so that you would not recognize me. 21-020
       It is the nature’s law that people are born,
       die and are born again. 21-020
       My dear! I wanted you to understand that,
       and that is why I took the form of Kāyasandihai.
       But Kānchanan was confused, thought I was his wife,
       and became angry with you and killed you with his sword.”
       Suffering, she sighed, wept and got up.
       Kanthil Pāvai—Thuvathihan—tells Manimekalai’s future 21-030
       At that time, the divine Thuvathihan, the Kanthil Pāvai,
       appeared before her and said, “Do not worry, Do not worry.
       Do not worry for the prince adorned with a beautiful alli garland,
       The prince was your husband in many previous births
       and you were his wife in those births. 21-030
       O you with long red-lined eyes,
       this birth is not the first time you were both together.
       Beautiful girl, you are confused thinking
       that this is your only birth. Do not feel sad.”
       .
       Manimekalai, her body shining like gold,
       heard the goddess, worshiped her and said,
       “You are the goddess of Potiyam mountains and you always tell the
       truth.
       I worship your divine feet. 21-040
       Rāgulan, my husband was bitten by a snake in his last birth
       and I trembled and grieved.
       Then he was killed with a sword by Kānchanan in this birth,
       Do you know that? If you do, give me your grace.”
       The story of Rāgulan, the sage Brahmadarman and the cook
       The divine Thuvathihan said to Manimekalai,
       “Listen, I will tell what happened to you and Rāgulan in your last
       birth.
       You are ornamented with precious jewels
       and you have long, beautiful eyes..
       When you and Rāgulan were on the bank of the river Kāyangarai,
       the faultless sage Brahmadarman came to your house.
       He would help people if they were confused
       and remove the troubles in their minds.
       You invited him in and told him,
       “We would like to make food for you.
       Please wait here until morning.” 21-050
       After the night had gone morning arrived.
       When the cook was bringing food for the sage,
       he slipped and fell, broke the pot and spilled all the food.
       Rāgulan was angry that the cook
       could not give food for the sage at the right time
       and took his sword and cut off the head of the cook.
       Rāgulan’s death happened because of his bad karma.
       O you with hair adorned with flowers.
       Rāgulan’s bad karma did not leave him,
       and it hurt you also.” 21-060
       Kanthil Pāvai tells Manimekalai her future
       “O you ornamented with jewels,
       ignorant people think that a god will help them remove cruel karma,
       but even if people are charitable,
       the results of their bad acts will come to them un their future
       births.
       That is why your husband was bitten by the snake. 21-070
       O you beautiful as a young vine, listen!
       When the king finds out about his son’s death, he will suffer.
       He will listen to all the other sages and put you in jail.
       At that time the queen will release you from the king’s jail
       and keep you with her.
       Mādhavi, your mother, knowing about the queen and you,
       will go to Aravanar Adigal, bowing to his lotus feet,
       and ask him to ask the queen to release you from jail.
       When Aravanar Adigal and Mādhavi go to the queen
       and request her to release you, the queen will do so. 21-080
       Then you will see the good King Punniyarājan
       and you will go with him to his country.
       He will listen to your words of dharma
       and then you both will sail in a boat to the island Manipallavam.
       O Manimekalai, in Manipallavam you will see Deepathilahai
       and she will tell you about your previous life.
       Then you will go to the Javaga country,
       assume the form of a male sage 21-090
       and go to the great city of Vanji.
       The Kanthil Pavai tells Manimekalai she will hear the philosophies
       of various religious scholars
       There are many philosophers in that city
       and you will listen to them.
       Some scholars say that god is the ancient one
       and that he created all the creatures of the world. (Saivites,
       Vaishanavites and worshipers of Brahma believe this)
       Some philosophers say that god is formless
       but creates all creatures with forms. (Advaitins believe this.)
       Some philosophers say
       that god removes all the sorrows and difficulties of his devotees
       and takes them to his world of pleasure. (Mimamsakas believe this.)
       Some philosophers say that god is different forms of the five
       elements.
       (Buddhists believe this.) 21-100
       O you with flowers in your hair,
       when you are in Vanji city, one philosopher will say,
       ‘There is no god.
       After people die, they are not born again.
       Why should one talk about dharma?’
       You know that there is birth and death.
       When you hear what he has said, you will laugh at him.
       He will say to you,
       ‘Tell me if you know anything better
       than what I have told you now.’
       You will tell him about your previous birth
       because you want to prove to him
       that dead people will be born again. 21-110
       The philosopher will say,
       ‘O you with arms like bamboo, when the goddess Manimekalai brought
       you here,
       you were in a dream state and confused.’
       O you like a young vine,
       you will not stop arguing with him
       and you will oppose his philosophy.
       You will answer, ‘What you say is not correct. A person does
       receive the results of their bad karma
       and dead people are born again.’
       You will advise him and remove his confusion.
       The queen will release you from prison and keep you with her.
       Don’t you know
       that creatures without consciousness
       such as trees, sand, stones and statues do not speak.
       If you do not know that listen to me and I will tell you. 21-120
       Intelligent people searching for suitable places
       have made and placed statues of gods and goddesses
       in famous ancient cities.
       They have put statues everywhere—
       on the streets where bannered chariots run,
       in temples of the gods, in famous gardens,
       on the banks of rivers and shores of flourishing places,
       in centers of the towns and public meeting places.
       They make sure that these statues are protected and guarded in the
       great city.
       They make statues of clay, stone, and wood
       and put them in places where they will not be harmed. 21-120
       They paint the images of gods on walls.
       They worship the statues of the gods they like,
       and the statues tell the past and the future
       to ignorant people and worship them.
       Thuvathihan, the Kanthil Pāvai, tells his life to Manimekalai
       O you lovely as a young vine, listen to my life.
       I am one of the divine ganas and am called Thuvathihan. 21-130
       I am a statue on the old pillar made by Mayan, the carpenter of the
       gods,
       and he made my form as I am on this pillar, which is my home.
       Even the gods do not know what people do.
       Chitrasenan, my dear friend, knew that I am here and came to see
       me.
       I went with him to many places where he danced.
       I painted and drew many pictures.
       People brought flowers and fragrances
       and offered them to the statues and praised us abundantly.
       I am happy and this is my story.
       Manimekalai, I have told you all about my life without fear.
       I hope you know my life now.” 21-140
       Manimekalai asks Thuvathihan to tell her future
       Manimekalai said, “I do not know my own future.
       Give me your grace and tell me what my future will be.”
       Thuvathihan said, “O you lovely as a vine,
       I will tell your future.
       The rain will fail in this Kānchi city and people will not be able
       to live.
       This city surrounded with golden forts will lose its beauty.
       When you come to know this,
       you must take the divine begging pot
       that is in the hands of the ancient goddess Muthiyāl.
       It is a remedy that will save people’s lives. 21-150
       O young one adorned with thick bangles,
       you will go to Aravanar with your mother and Sudhamathi
       to Kānchi city and by the grace of Aravanar,
       your male form will leave you.
       You will carry your begging pot and feed all creatures,
       and the pot will make the rain fall so the land flourishes.
       The people of the city will honor you, O ornamented one. 21-160
       Many other things will happen.
       After you tell Aravanar all the religious beliefs
       that you have heard from others,
       he will tell you how to do tapas, dharma,
       what things will happen in your life
       and ways to remove your sins.
       O you lovely as a vine,
       the Buddha will appear at that time like a sun
       to remove the troubles of people and give them happiness.
       He will spread the light of dharma.
       I may die and be born again to protect dharma.
       but I will not leave this place.
       O you lovely as a young vine,
       may you and your mothers live happily,
       and may the generosity of dharma flourish in your heart.
       You should do all that Aravanar tells you to do. 21-170
       After you have done many good works,
       you will die in Kānchi.
       After that you will be born as a man
       in all your births in the country of Uthara Magadam
       and you will continue to do generous deeds.
       The Buddha gives the grace of his dharma to all
       and you will become his best student and learn his dharma.
       You will no longer have desires and you will attain Nirvana.
       Hear me some more, O you with a beautiful forehead.
       The goddess Manimekalai knew that you gave food
       to Sadhu Chakran whom the goddess saved
       from the ocean rolling with waves in your previous birth 21-180
       and that is why she took you to Manipallavam.”
       In this way, Thuvathihan told Manimekalai of her future births.
       Manimekalai’s ocean of sorrow and confusion of mind went away.
       She was happy like a peacock released from a net.
       The sun god rose like a beautiful flower with its bright rays
       and woke the world from its sleep. 21-190
       -----------

                            22. ciṟaicey kātai
[ maṇimēkalai poruṭṭāl maṭintāṉ utayakumaraṉ eṉpatu mātavarvāyk kēṭṭa
maṉṉavaṉ maṇimēkalaiyai mantiriyākiya cōḻikaēṉātiyāl kāvalkoṇṭa pāṭṭu ]

       kaṭavuḷ maṇṭilam kāriruḷ cīppa
       neṭunilaik kantil niṉṟa pāvaiyoṭu
       mutiyōḷ kōṭṭam vaḻipaṭal purintōr
       utaya kumaraṟku uṟṟatai uraippac
       cātuyar kēṭṭuc cakkara vāḷattu
       mātavar ellām maṇimē kalaitaṉai
       iḷaṅkoṭi aṟivatum uṇṭō itueṉat
       tuḷaṅkātu āṅkuavaḷ uṟṟatai uraittalum
       āṅkuavaḷ taṉṉai āruyir nīṅkiya
       vēntaṉ ciṟuvaṉoṭu vēṟuiṭattu oḷittu,         22-10
       māperuṅ kōyil vāyilukku icaittuk
       kōyil maṉṉaṉaik kuṟukiṉar ceṉṟuīṅku
       uyarntuōṅku ucci uvāmati pōla
       nivantuōṅku veṇkuṭai maṇakam niḻalceya
       vēlum kōlum aruḷkaṇ viḻikka
       tītuiṉṟu uruḷkanī ēntiya tikiri
       niṉakkueṉa varainta āṇṭukaḷ ellām
       maṉakkuiṉi tāka vāḻiya vēntē!
       iṉṟē alla ippati maruṅkil
       kaṉṟiya kāmak kaḷḷāṭṭu ayarntu         22-20
       pattiṉip peṇṭir pālceṉṟu aṇukiyum
       naltavap peṇṭir piṉuḷam pōkkiyum
       tīviṉai uruppa uyirīṟu ceytōr
       pārāḷ vēntē paṇṭum palarāl:
       maṉmaruṅku aṟutta maḻuvāḷ neṭiyōṉ
       taṉmuṉ tōṉṟal takātuoḻi nīeṉak
       kaṉṉi ēvaliṉ kānta maṉṉavaṉ
       innakar kāppōr yāreṉa niṉaii
       nāvalam taṇpoḻil naṇṇār naṭukkuṟak
       kāval kaṇikai taṉakkuām kātalaṉ         22-30
       ikaḻntōr kāyiṉum eñcutal illōṉ
       kakantaṉ āmeṉak kātaliṉ kūuy
       aracuāḷ urimai niṉpāl iṉmaiyiṉ
       paracu rāmaṉniṉ pālvantu aṇukāṉ
       amara muṉivaṉ akattiyaṉ taṉātu
       tuyarnīṅku kiḷaviyiṉ yāṉtōṉ ṟaḷavum
       kakantaṉ kāttal kākanti eṉṟē
       iyainta nāmam ippatikku iṭṭuīṅku
       uḷvarik koṇṭuav uravōṉ peyarnāḷ
       teḷḷunīrk kāviri āṭiṉaḷ varūum         22-40
       pārppaṉi marutiyaip pāṅkōr iṉmaiyiṉ
       yāppuaṟai eṉṟē eṇṇiṉaṉ ākik
       kāviri vāyilil kakantaṉ ciṟuvaṉ
       nīvā eṉṉa, nēriḻai kalaṅki
       maṇtiṇi ñālattu maḻaivaḷam tarūum
       peṇṭir āyiṉ piṟarneñcu pukāar
       pukkēṉ piṟaṉuḷam purinūl mārpaṉ
       muttīp pēṇum muṟaieṉakku ileṉa
       mātuyar evvamoṭu maṉaiakam pukāaḷ
       pūta catukkam pukkaṉaḷ mayaṅkik         22-50
       koṇṭōṉ piḻaitta kuṟṟam tāṉilēṉ
       kaṇṭōṉ neñcil karappueḷi tāyiṉēṉ
       yāṉcey kuṟṟam yāṉaṟi killēṉ
       poyyiṉai kollō pūta catukkattut
       teyvam nīeṉac cēyiḻai araṟṟalum,
       māperum pūtam tōṉṟi maṭakkoṭi
       nīkēḷ eṉṟē nēriḻaikku uraikkum:
       teyvam toḻāaḷ koḻunaṉ toḻutueḻuvāḷ
       peyeṉap peyyum perumaḻai eṉṟaap         22-60
       poyyil pulavaṉ poruḷurai tēṟāy
       piciyum noṭiyum piṟarvāyk kēṭṭu
       vicipiṇi muḻaviṉ viḻākkōḷ virumpik
       kaṭavuḷ pēṇal kaṭaviyai ākaliṉ
       maṭavaral ēva maḻaiyum peyyātu
       niṟaiuṭaip peṇṭir tammē pōlap
       piṟarneñcu cuṭūum peṟṟiyum illai
       āṅkuavai oḻikuvai āyiṉ āyiḻai
       ōṅkuiru vāṉattu maḻaiyumniṉ moḻiyatu
       peṭṭāṅku oḻukum peṇṭiraip pōlak         22-70
       kaṭṭātu uṉṉaieṉ kaṭuntoḻil pācam
       maṉmuṟai eḻunāḷ vaittuavaṉ vaḻūum
       piṉmuṟai allatu eṉmuṟai illai
       īṅkueḻu nāḷil iḷaṅkoṭi niṉpāl
       vāṅkā neñciṉ mayariyai vāḷāl
       kakantaṉ kēṭṭuk kaṭitalum uṇṭueṉa
       ikanta pūtam eṭutturai ceytatuap
       pūtam uraitta nāḷāl āṅkuavaṉ
       tātai vāḷāl taṭiyavum paṭṭaṉaṉ.
       iṉṉum kēḷāy iruṅkaṭal uṭutta         22-80
       maṇāḷ celvattu maṉṉavar ēṟē!
       taruma tattaṉum taṉmā maṉmakaḷ
       perumatar maḻaikkaṇ vicākaiyum pēṇit
       teyvam kāṭṭum tippiya ōviyak
       kaiviṉai kaṭanta kaṇkavar vaṉappiṉar
       maittuṉaṉ muṟaimaiyāl yāḻōr maṇaviṉaikku
       ottaṉaḷ eṉṟē ūrmuḻutu alareḻap
       puṉaiyā ōviyam puṟampōntu eṉṉa
       maṉaiakam nīṅki vāḷnutal vicākai
       ulaka aṟaviyiṉ ūṭuceṉṟu ēṟi         22-90
       ilakuoḷik kantiṉ eḻutiya pāvāy
       ulakar perumpaḻi oḻippāy nīeṉa,
       mānakar uḷḷīr maḻaitarum ivaḷeṉa
       nāuṭaip pāvai naṅkaiyai eṭuttalum,
       teyvam kāṭṭit teḷittilēṉ āyiṉ
       maiyal ūrō maṉamācu oḻiyātu
       maittuṉaṉ maṉaiyāḷ maṟupiṟappu ākuvēṉ
       ippiṟappu ivaṉoṭum kūṭēṉ eṉṟē
       naltāy taṉakku naltiṟam cāṟṟi
       maṟṟuavaḷ kaṉṉi māṭattu aṭaintapiṉ,         22-100
       taruma tattaṉum tantaiyum tāyarum
       perunakar taṉṉaip piṟakiṭṭu ēkit
       tāḻtaru tuṉpam talaieṭut tāyeṉa
       nāuṭaip pāvaiyai nalampala ētti
       mikkōr uṟaiyum viḻupperuñ celvattut
       takkaṇa maturai tāṉceṉṟu aṭaintapiṉ,
       taruma tattaṉum taṉmā maṉmakaḷ
       viritaru pūṅkuḻal vicākaiyai allatu
       peṇṭiraip pēṇēṉ ippiṟappu oḻikeṉak
       koṇṭa viratam taṉṉuḷ kūṟi         22-110
       vāṇika marapiṉ varuporuḷ īṭṭi
       nīḷnitic celvaṉāy nīḷnila vēntaṉiṉ
       eṭṭip pūppeṟṟu irumup patiṟṟiyāṇṭu
       oṭṭiya celvattu uyarntōṉ āyiṉaṉ.
       anta ṇāḷaṉ oruvaṉ ceṉṟuīṅku
       eṉcey taṉaiyō irunitic celva
       pattiṉi illōr palaaṟam ceyyiṉum
       puttēḷ ulakam pukāar eṉpatu
       kēṭṭum aṟitiyō kēṭṭaṉai āyiṉ
       nīṭṭittu irātu niṉnakar aṭaikeṉat         22-120
       takka maturai tāṉvaṟitu āka
       ippatip pukuntaṉaṉ irunila vēntē!
       maṟṟavaṉ ivvūr vantamai kēṭṭup
       poṉtoṭi vicākaiyum maṉaippuṟam pōntu
       nallāḷ nāṇāḷ pallōr nāppaṇ
       allavai kaṭinta avaṉpāl ceṉṟu
       nammuḷnām aṟintilam nammai muṉnāḷ
       mammar ceyta vaṉappuyāṅku oḷittaṉa?
       āṟuaintu iraṭṭi yāṇṭuuṉakku āyatueṉ
       nāṟuaiṅ kūntalum naraivirā vuṟṟaṉa         22-130
       iḷamaiyum kāmamum yāṅkuoḷit taṉavō
       uḷaṉil lāḷa! eṉakkuīṅku uraiyāy
       ippiṟappu āyiṉyāṉ niṉaṭi aṭaiyēṉ
       appiṟappu yāṉniṉ aṭittoḻil kēṭkuvaṉ
       iḷamaiyum nillā yākkaiyum nillā
       vaḷaviya vāṉperuñ celvamum nillā
       puttēḷ ulakam putalvarum tārār
       mikka aṟamē viḻuttuṇai āvatu
       tāṉam ceyeṉat taruma tattaṉum
       māmaṉ makaḷpāl vāṉporuḷ kāṭṭi         22-140
       āṅkuavaṉ avaḷuṭaṉ ceyta nalaṟam
       ōṅkuiru vāṉattu mīṉiṉum palavāl.
       kumari mūttaak koṭuṅkuḻai nallāḷ
       amaraṉ aruḷāl akalnakar iṭūum
       paṭupaḻi nīṅkip pallōr nāppaṇ
       koṭimiṭai vītiyil varuvōḷ kuḻalmēl
       maruti poruṭṭāl maṭintōṉ tammuṉ
       karukiya neñciṉaṉ kāmam kāḻkoḷac
       curiirum pittai cūḻntupuṟam tāḻnta
       viripū mālai virumpiṉaṉ vāṅkit         22-150
       tollōr kūṟiya maṇamītu āmeṉa
       elaviḻ tārōṉ iṭuvāṉ vēṇṭi
       mālai vāṅka ēṟiya ceṅkai
       nīlak kuñci nīṅkātu ākaliṉ,
       ēṟiya ceṅkai iḻintilatu intak
       kārikai poruṭṭueṉa, kakantaṉ kēṭṭuk
       kaṭuñciṉam tiruki makaṉtuyar nōkkāṉ
       maintaṉ taṉṉai vāḷāl eṟintaṉaṉ
       ūḻitoṟu ūḻi ulakam kāttu
       vāḻi eṅkō maṉṉava eṉṟu         22-160
       mātavar tammuḷōr mātavaṉ kūṟalum,
       vīyā viḻuccīr vēntaṉ kēṭṭaṉaṉ
       iṉṟē alla eṉṟueṭuttu uraittu
       naṉṟuaṟi mātavir nalampalam kāṭṭiṉir
       iṉṟum uḷatō ivviṉai uraimeṉa,
       veṉṟi neṭuvēl vēntaṉ kēṭpat
       tītuiṉṟu āka ceṅkōl vēntueṉa
       mātavar tammuḷōr mātavaṉ uraikkum:
       muṭiporuḷ uṇarntōr mutunīr ulakil
       kaṭiyap paṭṭaṉa aintuuḷa avaṟṟil         22-170
       kaḷḷum poyyum kaḷavum kolaiyum
       taḷḷā tākum kāmam tampāl
       āṅkuatu kaṭintōr allavai kaṭintōreṉa
       nīṅkiṉar aṉṟē niṟaitava mākkaḷ
       nīṅkār aṉṟē nīḷnila vēntē!
       tāṅkā narakam taṉṉiṭai uḻappōr
       cēyari neṭuṅkaṇ cittirā patimakaḷ
       kātalaṉ uṟṟa kaṭuntuyar poṟāaḷ
       mātavi mātavar paḷḷiyuḷ aṭaintaṉaḷ.
       maṟṟavaḷ peṟṟa maṇimē kalaitāṉ         22-180
       muṟṟā mulaiyiṉaḷ mutirāk kiḷaviyaḷ
       ceykuvaṉ tavameṉac ciṟṟilum pērilum
       aiyam koṇṭuuṇṭu ampalam aṭaintaṉaḷ
       āṅkuavaḷ aviyal piṉaḷē āyiṉum
       nīṅkāṉ avaḷai niḻalpōl yāṅkaṇum
       kārikai poruṭṭāl kāmam kāḻkoḷa
       āriruḷ añcāṉ ampalam aṭaintaṉaṉ
       kāyacaṇ ṭikaivaṭivu āyiṉaḷ kārikai
       kāyacaṇ ṭikaiyum āṅkuuḷaḷ ātaliṉ;
       kāyacaṇ ṭikaitaṉ kaṇavaṉ ākiya         22-190
       vāyvāḷ viñcaiyaṉ oruvaṉ tōṉṟi
       īṅkuivaḷ poruṭṭāl vantaṉaṉ ivaṉeṉa
       āṅkuavaṉ tīviṉai uruttatu ākaliṉ;
       matimaruḷ veṇkuṭai maṉṉa! niṉmakaṉ
       utaya kumaraṉ oḻiyāṉ āka,
       āṅkuavaḷ taṉṉai ampalattu ēṟṟi
       ōṅkuiruḷ yāmattu ivaṉaiāṅku uyttuk
       kāyacaṇ ṭikaitaṉ kaṇavaṉ ākiya
       vāyvāḷ viñcaiyaṉ taṉṉaiyum kūuy
       viñcai makaḷpāl ivaṉvan taṉaṉeṉa         22-200
       vañca viñcaiyaṉ maṉattaiyum kalakki
       āṅkuavaṉ taṉkai vāḷāl ampalattu
       īṅkuivaṉ taṉṉai eṟintatueṉṟu ētti
       mātavar tammuḷōr mātavaṉ uraittalum,
       cōḻika ēṉāti taṉmukam nōkki
       yāṉceyaṟ pālatu iḷaṅkōṉ taṉṉait
       tāṉcey tataṉāl takavuilaṉ viñcaiyaṉ
       mātavar nōṉpum maṭavār kaṟpum
       kāvalaṉ kāval iṉṟueṉiṉ iṉṟāl
       makaṉai muṟaiceyta maṉṉavaṉ vaḻiōr         22-210
       tuyarviṉai yāḷaṉ tōṉṟiṉaṉ eṉpatu
       vēntar tañcevi uṟuvataṉ muṉṉam
       īṅkuivaṉ taṉṉaiyum īmattu ēṟṟik
       kaṇikai makaḷaiyum kāvalceyka eṉṟaṉaṉ
       aṇikiḷar neṭumuṭi aracuāḷ vēntueṉ.
       ciṟaicey kātai muṟṟiṟṟu.
       -----------

                 Chapter 22. The king imprisons Manimekalai
       When the darkness of night of the world that god created was going
       away,
       people came to worship the goddess Muthiyāl at her temple
       and told the sages in Chakravālakkottam what had happened to
       Udayakumaran.
       The sages asked Manimekalai,
       “O you like a young vine, do you know about the prince?”
       She told them what had happened without fear.
       The sages hid the prince’s body and put Manimekalai in a different
       room.
       The sages from Chakravālakkottam
       went to the palace of the king, Udayakumaran’s father, and said to
       him,
       “May your full royal umbrella that resembles the moon
       be raised high and protect the world! 22--010
       May your spear and scepter give their grace!
       May your wheel roll without giving any troubles to your people!
       May all the days you live give happiness to your mind!
       Not only now, but from ancient times also
       people have drunk and played the game of love
       and people with bad karma have approached chaste women
       and good women and hurt them, 22-020
       O king of this world, born in the dynasty of Nediyoon Vishnu,
       I will tell you a story.
       The story of King Kānthan and Kahandan, the son of a courtesan
       King Kānthan was ordered by the goddess Sambāpathi
       to leave the city so that he would not appear before Parasuraman
       and be destroyed by him as many other kings had been. 22-030
       King Kānthan, worried that he did not have someone
       to rule his country after him,
       decided to make Kahandan the new king, a hero
       whose enemies shiver when they fight with him.
       Kahandan was the son of a dancing girl
       and he was never afraid of any enemies
       however they might oppose him.
       Kānthan called Kahandan and told him,
       ‘Because you were not born to a king,
       Parasurāma will not come to fight with you.
       If I go to see the sage Agastya,
       my troubles will be removed by his grace.
       I will return soon, O Kahandan.
       Until I come back, protect this country.’
       The king Kānthan named the place Kāhandi
       and, disguised in a different form, left.”
       The sages tell the story of Mārudi to the king, father of the
       Prince.
       The sages continued,
       “One day a Brahmin lady named Mārudi
       went to take a bath in the Kaviri river. 22-040
       Kānthan’s younger son saw her when there was no one around,
       thought that she was not a chaste woman
       and called her to come near him.
       Mārudi, adorned with precious ornaments, thought,
       ‘If a chaste woman asks the rain to pour, it will pour.
       Such women will not enter the hearts of other men.
       He called me and I have entered his heart.
       I am not fit to be the wife of a Brahmin
       who wears a sacred thread
       and performs sacrifices with the three fires.’
       She felt very sad and did not go to her house
       but went instead to a Buddha sadukkam. 22-050
       She prayed to the god,
       ‘Even though I have not been unfaithful to my husband,
       another man has thought of me.
       I have followed all the ḍharma of a chaste woman
       and lived always inside my house.
       I do not know what mistake I have done.
       You are the god of the Buddha sadukkam.
       Are you not a true god? Give me justice.’
       A great Bhudam appeared before her
       and told her, decorated with lovely ornaments,
       ‘O you beautiful as a vine, hear me.
       Valluvar whose poems never lie, says,
       “If a chaste woman living without worshiping any god
       but her husband, asks it to rain, it will rain,” 22-060
       but you do not follow his words.
       You listened to riddles and meaningless words of others
       and went to festivals
       where drums tied with belts were played, and prayed to gods.
       If you ask the rain to come, it will not come.
       You are not like other chaste women
       and are able to make men burn with passion. 22-070
       If you stop all that you have been doing
       and cease listening to the meaningless words of others
       and praying to false gods,
       then if you order the rain to fall from the sky it will rain.
       I will not give you trouble as I do to unfaithful women.
       When king Kānthan returns he will do what is just for you.
       I will not be able to do anything for seven days until the king
       returns.
       Seven days from today, Kānthan will come to know
       how his son was fascinated with you
       and he will kill him with his sword.’
       Just as the Bhudam said, after seven days
       Kānthan killed his evil son
       because he had been attracted to Mārudi.” 22-080.
       The Story of Dharmadattan and Visākai.
       Another sage told the story of Dharmadattan.
       “O king, bull among famous kings
       and ruler of this earth surrounded by the ocean,
       Dharmadattan and his uncle’s daughter Visākai
       whose lovely eyes were like a beautiful painting made by the gods
       lived in a village where people gossiped that Visākai
       had agreed to marry Dharmadattan
       in a Gandharva marriage because he was her uncle’s son.
       Visākai did not like the gossip of the village,
       left her home, went to Ulaga Aravi temple. 22-090
       She thought that the people of the village
       would only stop blaming her
       if the goddess told them she is a chaste woman.
       She asked the goddess, ‘O goddess on the pillar,
       take away the bad gossip of the village.’
       The goddess praised her and said to the villagers,
       ‘O people of the town, she is a chaste woman
       and if she asks the rain to pour, it will pour.’
       She told her mother,
       ‘I will be born again and become his wife in my next birth.
       In this birth I will not marry anyone.’
       After saying these good words, she joined a monastery. 22-100
       After Visākai left the city,
       Dharmadattan and his parents worshiped the goddess and prayed,
       saying, ‘Take away our troubles.’
       Then they left their city Kaviripumpattinam,
       and went south to Madurai where many rich people lived.
       Dharmadattan vowed, ‘I will not love any other woman
       except my uncles’s daughter Visākai
       whose lovely hair is adorned with fragrant flowers
       and I will only spend my life with her.’ 22-110
       He became a rich merchant and earned much wealth.
       The king bestowed on him the title, “Etti”
       and gave him a golden flower.
       He became sixty years old and lived a prosperous life.
       One day a Brahmin saw him and said,
       ‘You are a very rich man. What are you doing here?
       Don’t you know that men without a wife cannot reach heaven
       even if they give much charity?
       If you realize that,
       you should immediately go to your own town
       and live with your wife.’ 22-120
       O king of the large earth,
       Dharmadattan left Madurai in the south and went back to his own
       town.
       Madurai became poor because he, its richest man, was no longer
       there.
       Visākai, ornamented with golden bracelets,
       heard that Dharmadattan had come to her town.
       She came out of the monastery and went to see him.
       He looked like someone who has always done good.
       She was not ashamed to see him because many people were there.
       She went near him and asked,
       ‘We cannot recognize each other any longer.
       Where has the beauty that fascinated us gone?
       You are sixty years old now
       and my fragrant hair has became grey. 22-130
       Where did our youth and passion go?
       You are without a wife and do not have a firm mind.
       I will not be your wife in this birth
       but I will be your servant and wife in my next birth.
       Youth does not stay in this world for anyone,
       and great wealth will not remain.
       Even your sons cannot give you heaven.
       The only help for a person is the charity he does,
       so you should perform charity and help people.’ 22-140
       Dharmadattan showed all the wealth that he had earned to her,
       and they both performed many acts of charity,
       more than there are stars in the sky.
       Visāhai did not marry and became old.
       The village stopped gossiping about her.
       She left the monastery
       and wandered around in the streets
       that were decorated with flags.
       The Sages tell another story about Visāhai
       One time when Visāhai was walking on the street,
       Kānthan’s elder son came out and saw her.
       His heart was filled with dark thoughts
       and he was filled with passion.
       He wore a flower garland in his curly hair
       and it hung down his back.
       He thought that in the past, people would marry just by exchanging
       garlands,
       but when he took his shining garland to put it on Visākai, 22-150
       as he put his hand on his dark hair to get the garland
       his hand stuck there and he could not remove it.
       His father Kānthan heard people say
       that his son had been intending to garland Visākai
       but that his hand stuck on his hair when he went to remove his
       garland.
       He became angry at his son, took his sword and killed him.” 22-160
       The sages said,
       “O king, may you live protecting the world for eons!”
       The famous king heard the stories the sages told
       and replied, “It is not only in the past—
       even in these days, evil things happen.
       Please tell me what you know about such things.”
       One of the sages tells the story of Manimekalai and Udayakumaran
       One of the sages said,
       “O king, may your scepter be untainted by any evil deeds!
       In this world surrounded by the ocean there are five evil deeds.
       Drinking toddy, telling lies, stealing and killing are four, 22-170
       and the fifth is passion, and if someone removes that from his
       mind,
       all the other four will be removed,
       If someone does not remove passion from his mind, he will go to
       hell.
       I’ll tell you the story of Udayakumaran
       who died because of his passion for Manimekalai.
       Mādhavi the daughter of Chitrāpathi
       suffered when she heard of Kovalan’s end
       and went to stay in the Buddhist monastery.
       Even when her daughter Manimekalai 22-180
       was young, before she could speak full sentences
       and her breasts had not yet developed,
       she had wished to do tapas,
       beg for food from small and large houses
       and stay in the temple.
       When she had grown, even though prince Udayakumaran
       knew that she had become a bhikshuni,
       he decided not leave her and follow her like her shadow.
       He was fascinated with her
       and went to the temple in the dark night without any fear. 22-190.
       When Manimekalai found out that Udayakumaran
       was coming to see her, she disguised herself
       as Kāyasandihai, Kānchanan’s wife.
       At night Kānchanan, an Apsaras from the sky,
       came to see his wife Kāyasandihai
       and saw Udayakumaran following Kāyasandihai.
       Not knowing it was really Manimekalai disguised as Kāyasandihai,
       he thought Udayakumaran was following his wife.
       It was fate of each of them to encounter the other. 22-200
       O king with a white royal umbrella that vanquishes the light of the
       moon,
       Udayakumaran, your son, did not leave the temple where Manimekalai
       was.
       His evil fate made him stay there
       and the evil fate of Kānchanan who carries a strong sword
       made Kānchanan arrive at the temple in the dark night.
       Blinded by his fate, Kānchanan took his sword
       and killed Udayakumaran in the temple.”
       After the sage told this story to the king, the king said,
       “What Kānchanan did to my son Udayakumaran
       is what I should have done.
       It was the right thing for him to do.
       If a king does not protect the tapas of sages
       and the chastity of women, he will not be a just king.
       I do not want the other kings to blame me
       saying that I am a king and I did not practice justice
       because I want to save my son.
       I was born in the dynasty of Manu,
       the king who killed his son for a cow to render justice.
       Put my son on the funeral pyre
       and Manimekalai, the daughter of a courtesan, in prison.”
       So spoke the crowned king, the ruler of his country
       and truly a just king. 22-215.
       ---------
                           __________________________

                          23. ciṟaiviṭu kātai
            [ maṇimēkalai ciṟaivīṭuceyta irācamā tēvi
              kuṟaikoṇṭirappac cīlamkoṭutta pāṭṭu

       maṉṉavaṉ aruḷāl vācan tavaieṉum
       nalneṭuṅ kūntal naraimū tāṭṭi
       aracarkku āyiṉum kumaraṟku āyiṉum
       tirunilak kiḻamait tēviyarkku āyiṉum
       kaṭṭurai virittum kaṟṟavai pakarntum
       paṭṭavai tuṭaikkum payaṅkeḻu moḻiyiṉaḷ
       ilaṅkuari neṭuṅkaṇ irācamā tēvi
       kalaṅkuañar oḻiyak kaṭituceṉṟu eyti
       aḻutuaṭi vīḻātu āyiḻai taṉṉait
       toḻutumuṉ niṉṟu tōṉṟa vāḻttik nbsp;       23-10
       koṟṟam koṇṭu kuṭipuṟam kāttum
       ceṟṟa tevvar tēemtamatu ākkiyum
       taruppaiyiṉ kiṭatti vāḷiṉ pōḻntu
       ceruppukal maṉṉar celvuḻic celkeṉa
       mūttu viḷitalik kuṭippiṟan tōrkku
       nāppuṭai peyarātu nāṇuttakavu uṭaittē
       taṉmaṇ kāttaṉṟu piṟarmaṇ koṇṭaṉṟu
       eṉeṉap paṭumō niṉmakaṉ maṭintatu!
       maṉpatai kākkum maṉṉavaṉ taṉmuṉ
       tuṉpam koḷḷēl eṉṟuavaḷ pōyapiṉ,         23-20
       kaiyāṟṟu uḷḷam karantuakattu aṭakkip
       poyyāṟṟu oḻukkam koṇṭupuṟam maṟaittu
       vañcam ceykuvaṉ maṇimē kalaiyaieṉṟu
       amcil ōti aracaṉukku orunāḷ
       piṟarpiṉ cellāp pikkuṇik kōlattu
       aṟivu tirintōṉ aracuiyal tāṉilaṉ
       karumpuuṭait taṭakkaik kāmaṉ kaiyaṟa
       arumpeṟal iḷamai perumpiṟitu ākkum
       aṟivu talaippaṭṭa āyiḻai taṉakkuc
       ciṟaitak kaṉṟu ceṅkōl vēntueṉac         23-30
       ciṟappiṉ pālār makkaḷ allār
       maṟappiṉ pālār maṉṉarkku eṉpatu
       aṟintaṉai āyiṉiv āyiḻai taṉṉaic
       ceṟinta ciṟainōy tīrkkeṉṟu iṟaicola,
       eṉṉōṭu iruppiṉum irukkaiv iḷaṅkoṭi
       taṉōṭu eṭuppiṉum takaikkunar ileṉṟu
       aṅkuavaḷ taṉaikkūuy avaḷtaṉ ṉōṭu
       koṅkuaviḻ kuḻalāḷ kōyiluḷ pukkuāṅku,
       aṟivu tirintuiv akalnakar ellām
       eṟitaru kōlamyāṉ ceykuval eṉṟē         23-40
       mayalpakai ūṭṭa maṟupiṟappu uṇarntāḷ
       ayarppatu ceyyā aṟiviṉaḷ āka,
       kallā iḷaiñaṉ oruvaṉaik kūuy
       vallāṅkuc ceytu maṇimē kalaitaṉ
       iṇaivaḷar iḷamulai ēntueḻil ākattup
       puṇarkuṟi ceytu poruntiṉaḷ eṉṉum
       pāṉmaik kaṭṭurai palarkkuurai eṉṟē
       kāṇam palavum kainiṟai koṭuppa,
       āṅkuavaṉ ceṉṟuav āyiḻai irunta
       pāṅkil oruciṟaip pāṭuceṉṟu aṇaitalum,         23-50
       tēvi vañcam itueṉat teḷintu
       nāiyal mantiram naṭuṅkātu ōti
       āṇmaik kōlattu āyiḻai iruppak
       kāṇam peṟṟōṉ kaṭuntuyar eyti
       aracar urimaiyil āṭavar aṇukār
       nirayak koṭumakaḷ niṉaippuaṟi yēṉeṉṟu
       akanakar kaiviṭṭu āṅkuavaṉ pōyapiṉ,
       makaṉainōy ceytāḷai vaippatu eṉeṉṟu
       uyyā nōyiṉ ūṇoḻin taṉaḷeṉap
       poynnōy kāṭṭip puḻukkuaṟai aṭaippa         23-60
       ūṇoḻi mantiram uṭaimaiyiṉ anta
       vāḷnutal mēṉi varuntātu iruppa,
       aieṉa vimmi āyiḻai naṭuṅkic
       ceytavat tāṭṭiyaic ciṟumai ceytēṉ
       eṉmakaṟku uṟṟa iṭukkaṇ poṟātu
       poṉnēr aṉaiyāy poṟukkeṉṟu avaḷtoḻa,
       nīla patitaṉ vayiṟṟil tōṉṟiya
       ēlam kamaḻtār irākulaṉ taṉṉai
       aḻalkaṇ nākam āruyir uṇṇa
       viḻittal āṟṟēṉ eṉuyir cuṭunāḷ         23-70
       yāṅkuiruntu amutaṉai iḷaṅkōṉ taṉakkup
       pūṅkoṭi nallāy poruntātu ceytaṉai
       uṭaṟkuaḻu taṉaiyō uyirkkuaḻu taṉaiyō
       uṭaṟkuaḻu taṉaiyēl uṉmakaṉ taṉṉai
       eṭuttup puṟaṅkāṭṭu iṭṭaṉar yārē
       uyirkkuaḻu taṉaiyēl uyirpukum pukkil
       ceyappāṭṭu viṉaiyāl terintuuṇarvu ariyatu
       avvuyirkku aṉpiṉai āyiṉ āytoṭi
       evvuyirkku āyiṉum iraṅkal vēṇṭum
       maṟṟuuṉ makaṉai māperun tēvi         23-80
       ceṟṟa kaḷvaṉ ceytatu kēḷāy:
       maṭaikkalam citaiya vīḻnta maṭaiyaṉai
       uṭaltuṇi ceytuāṅku uruttueḻum valviṉai
       nañcuviḻi araviṉ naluyir vāṅki
       viñcaiyaṉ vāḷāl vīṭṭiyatu aṉṟē!
       yāṅkuaṟin taṉaiyō īṅkuitu nīeṉil
       pūṅkoṭi nallāy pukuntatu itueṉa
       moymmalarp pūmpoḻil pukkatu mutalāt
       teyvak kaṭṭurai teḷintatai īṟā
       uṟṟatai ellām oḻivuiṉṟu uraittu,         23-90
       maṟṟum uraiceyum maṇimē kalaitāṉa
       mayalpakai ūṭṭiṉai maṟupiṟappu uṇarntēṉ
       ayarppatu ceyyā aṟiviṉēṉ āyiṉēṉ
       kallāk kayavaṉ kāriruḷ tāṉvara
       nallāy āṇuru nāṉkoṇṭu iruntēṉ,
       ūṇoḻi mantiram uṭaimaiyiṉ aṉṟō
       māṇiḻai ceyta vañcam piḻaittatu.
       antaram cēṟalum ayaluruk kōṭalum
       cintaiyiṉ koṇṭilēṉ ceṉṟa piṟaviyil
       kātalaṉ payantōy kaṭuntuyar kaḷaintu         23-100
       tītuuṟu vevviṉai tīrppatu poruṭṭāl
       taiyāl uṉtaṉ taṭumāṟṟu avalattu
       eyyā maiyaltīrntu iṉurai kēḷāy:
       āḷpavar kalakkuṟa mayaṅkiya nalnāṭṭuk
       kāruka maṭantai kaṇavaṉum kaiviṭa
       īṉṟa kuḻaviyoṭu tāṉvēṟu āki
       māṉṟuōr ticaipōy varaiyāḷ vāḻvuḻip
       putalvaṉ taṉṉaiōr purinūl mārpaṉ
       patiyōr aṟiyāp pāṉmaiyiṉ vaḷarkka
       āṅkuap putalvaṉ avaḷtiṟam aṟiyāṉ         23-110
       tāṉpuṇarntu aṟintupiṉ taṉuyir nīttatum,
       nīrnacai vēṭkaiyiṉ neṭuṅkaṭam uḻalum
       cūlmutir maṭamāṉ vayiṟukiḻittu ōṭak
       kāṉa vēṭṭuvaṉ kaṭuṅkaṇai turappa
       māṉmaṟi viḻuntatu kaṇṭu maṉammayaṅkip
       payirkkural kēṭṭuataṉ pāṉmaiyaṉ āki
       uyirppoṭu ceṅkaṇ ukutta nīrkaṇṭu
       ōṭṭi eytōṉ ōruyir tuṟantatum
       kēṭṭum aṟitiyō vāḷtaṭaṅ kaṇṇi!
       kaṭāa yāṉaimuṉ kaḷkā muṟṟōr         23-120
       viṭāatu ceṉṟuataṉ veṇkōṭṭu vīḻvatu
       uṇṭa kaḷḷiṉ uṟucerukku āvatu
       kaṇṭum aṟitiyō kārikai nallāy! urai
       poyyāṟṟu oḻukkam poruḷeṉak koṇṭōr
       kaiyāṟṟu avalam kaṭantatum uṇṭō?
       kaḷavuēr vāḻkkaiyar uṟūum kaṭuntuyar
       iḷavēyt tōḷāykku itueṉa vēṇṭā
       maṉpēr ulakattu vāḻvōrkku iṅkuivai
       tuṉpam taruvaṉa tuṟattal vēṇṭum
       kaṟṟa kalvi aṉṟāl kārikai         23-130
       ceṟṟam ceṟuttōr muṟṟa uṇarntōr
       mallalmā ñālattu vāḻvōr eṉpōr
       allal mākkaṭku illatu nirappunar
       tiruntuēr elvaḷai celulaku aṟintōr
       varunti vantōr arumpaci kaḷaintōr
       tuṉpam aṟukkum tuṇiporuḷ uṇarntōr
       maṉpataikku ellām aṉpuoḻi yāreṉa
       ñāṉa nalnīr naṉkaṉam teḷittut
       tēṉār ōti cevimutal vārttu
       makaṉtuyar neruppā maṉamviṟaku āka         23-140
       akamcuṭu ventī āyiḻai avippa,
       tēṟupaṭu ciṉṉīr pōlat teḷintu
       māṟukoṇṭu ōrā maṉattiṉaṉ āki
       āṅkuavaḷ toḻutalum, āyiḻai poṟāaḷ
       tāṉtoḻutu ēttit takuti ceytilai
       kātalaṉ payantōy aṉṟiyum kāvalaṉ
       māperun tēvieṉṟu etirvaṇaṅ kiṉaḷeṉ.
       ciṟaiviṭu kātai muṟṟiṟṟu.
       --------------

             Chapter 23. The queen Rājamādevi and Manimekalai
       The Queen and Manimekalai
       The bright-eyed queen went to see Vāsantavai, an old lady.
       She would give good advice and say comforting words to kings,
       princes and queens
       and help them get beyond their sorrow.
       The queen fell at Vāsantavai’s feet and worshiped her.
       Vāsantavai did not bless her but said,
       “Kings protect their citizens,
       conquer enemies and take their countries.
       If kings do not die in wars,
       the priests put their bodies
       on darba grass after they have died
       and cut them with a sword. 23-010
       It is a shame when kings born in the Chola family
       die from sickness and not from fighting.
       Your son did not die in a war to protect his country
       or to conquer enemies.
       How could anyone praise him?
       You should not feel sad in front of other kings,
       protectors of their people,
       for what the king, his father, did is just.
       and my tongue does not even want
       to speak about kings who don’t die in battle.”
       Then she left. 23-020
       The queen thought,
       “I will keep my hatred for Manimekalai in my heart
       but I will not show anyone my evil thoughts
       and pretend that I am a good person.
       I will hurt Manimekalai later. ”
       She went to the king, father of Udayakumaran, and said,
       “O king with an upright scepter, Manimekalai is a monk
       and the ignorant prince went behind her because Kama
       with a sugarcane bow made him love her.
       Followers of evil ways in life
       should not be born as the sons of kings.
       Udayakumaran was not fit to be the prince.
       O king, Manimekalai has not done anything wrong.
       To keep her in prison is not good. Free her, 23 -030
       and let her, beautiful as a young vine stay with me.
       Even if she goes around with her begging pot
       no one will hurt her.”
       The king released Manimekalai
       and the queen took her whose hair was filled
       with blooming kongo flowers into her palace.
       She thought “I will make the people of this village hurt her.”
       She gave Manimekalai a drink that would make her dizzy and lose
       consciousness
       but Manimekalai was not affected and remained aware
       because of the mantra given by the goddess that saved her. 23-040
       The queen did not stop.
       She called an uneducated man,
       gave him gold coins and asked him to go and tell all the people
       that Manimekalai had embraced him
       and her breasts had marked his chest.
       The man sent by the queen went to the temple
       where Manimekalai was. 23-050
       She saw him, realized that he had come to hurt her,
       and she recited the mantra she knew to change into a man.
       The man saw Manimekalai disguised as a man, was frightened and
       thought,
       “This is the palace for queens. Men cannot enter it.
       I do not know what is happening.”
       He left the city and ran away.
       The queen thought that Manimekalai should not be allowed to live
       because she was the cause for her son’s death,
       She kept her in a dark room and told all the servants
       that they should not feed her anything,
       but Manimekalai knew a mantra that keeps people alive without food.
       She recited it and was able to survive without eating. 23-060
       The queen, seeing that Manimekalai was not hurt
       by anything she did, realized that she was a sage.
       She told Manimekalai, “I did these things to you
       because my son suffered so much because of you.
       O you bright as gold, forgive me.”
       The queen bowed to Manimekalai.
       Manimekalai tells the story of her previous life to the queen.
       Manimekalai told her story to the queen.
       She said, “Rāgulan, my husband in my last birth,
       was born to the king Neelapathi.
       When he was bitten by a snake and died, I entered fire.
       Rāgulan was born to you as Udayakumaran in this birth.
       Now how can you say he is your son
       and cry for the young prince? 23-070
       You are beautiful as a flowering vine.
       Are you crying for his body or for his soul?
       If you are crying only for his body,
       it was burned on the burning ground.
       If you are crying for his soul,
       it is hard to know what or where will it be in this birth
       because that is decided only by his karma.
       If you are sorry for his soul,
       then you should feel sorry for all creatures. 23-080
       Listen, do you know what the prince, that thief, did?
       In his previous birth a hungry sage
       came to the place where Rāgulan and I were staying.
       We both asked the sage to stay and have food,
       and asked the cook to prepare food for him.
       When the cook brought the food,
       he slipped and dropped the pot that had the food in it.
       Rāgulan got angry at the cook, stabbed him and killed him.
       He did an evil deed and the bad karma from that deed
       caused him to be bitten by a snake in that birth.
       Rāgulan was born as your son Udayakumaran in this birth.
       Manimekalai tells the queen the story of Kānchanan and Kāyasandihai
       O you, lovely as a flowering vine,
       Kānchanan, an apsaras from the sky
       came to the earth looking for his wife.
       His wife Kāyasandihai was cursed by a sage
       and was wandering on the earth, always hungry.
       You may ask me how I know all these things.
       I will tell what happened in my life.” 23-090
       Manimekalai told the queen all the things
       that happened to herfrom the time
       she entered the flower garden and saw the prince
       to the time when she listened
       to the divine advice of Aravanar Adigal.
       Manimekalai continued,
       “O queen, you thought of me as your enemy
       and gave me a drug that would make me unconscious,
       but I was able to manage and not be affected by it
       because I had a mantra in my previous birth. 23-100
       At that time an ignorant thief sent by you
       came in the dark night and tried to hurt me.
       I happened to know a mantra to disguise myself.
       I recited it and changed into a man.
       He saw me, was frightened and ran away
       O queen, ornamented with jewels,
       the bad things you did to me did not hurt me.
       I escaped from all the troubles you gave me
       because I know the mantras
       that the goddess gave me and I used them.
       In my last birth I did not know the mantra
       that lets me fly in the sky or take different forms. 23-100
       You gave birth to my dear husband,
       but you can get beyond the sorrow of losing your son.
       You lost him because of your previous karma.
       O dear one, hear my words which can cure your sorrow.
       Manimekalai tells the queen the story of the boy who loved his
       mother.
       A housewife left her country
       because there was trouble in the kingdom.
       Her husband also left her at the same time
       leaving her alone and pregnant.
       When she arrived another city by walking,
       she gave birth to a small boy
       and, because she did not know how to take care of him,
       she left him and went on a different way.
       She left the child in a village
       and a Brahmin wearing a sacred thread
       took the child, thinking it was an orphan, and raised it.
       The village people did not know where the child had come from. 23
       -110
       The boy did not know his mother
       and he grew up in the village as a Brahmin.
       He became involved with his mother
       without knowing that she was his mother
       and had a relationship with her,
       but when he knew it was his mother that he loved,
       he gave up his life.
       Manimekalai tells the queen a story about a deer
       Do you know the story of the deer?
       A pregnant deer was wandering about to find water because she was
       thirsty.
       A hunter saw it and shot an arrow, piercing her womb.
       A baby deer came out of its womb.
       The hunter saw the fawn crying,
       threw his arrows down and gave up his life. 23-120
       Manimekalai gives the queen advice for living
       O you with large eyes sharp as swords,
       if people drunk on palm wine follow behind elephants
       they can be hurt by their white tusks.
       Have you heard of that, O beautiful woman?
       [In her previous birth Manimekalai’s sister Veera
       drank too much, went in front of an elephant and was killed.]
       Did you ever hear that if people
       walk on an evil path and tell lies
       they can live happily?
       Your beautiful arms are as round as bamboos!
       I do not have to tell you
       how thieves living by stealing suffer.
       The five faults—drinking, stealing, killing, telling lies, and
       lust—
       cause trouble for anyone.
       They should be removed from everyone’s lives. 23-130
       Mere education is not enough.
       The wise and those without anger
       are the ones who really live this world.
       O you adorned with lovely bracelets,
       if people give to the poor
       they truly know how to reach moksha.
       Those who give food and take away the hunger of suffering people
       know how to reach heaven.
       They always love the people of the earth.”
       The queen felt better after listening to Manimekalai
       and the wise words of knowledge she spoke. 23-138
       The sorrow that she felt from losing her son that burned like fire
       was appeased by Manimekalai’s water-like words. 23-144
       The queen bowed to Manimekalai,
       but Manimekalai ornamented with jewels
       did not feel it was right for the queen to bow to her
       and said, “What you do is not right.
       I am not worth being bowed to by you.
       Not only did you give birth to my dear husband,
       you are the great queen of the king,”
       and she bowed to the queen. 23-147
       -------------
                           __________________________

                  24. āputtiraṉ nāṭu aṭainta kātai
[ maṇimēkalai mānakaroḻintu āputtiraṉ nāṭu aṭainta pāṭṭu ]

       maṉṉa kumaraṉai vañcam puṇartta
       tolmutu kaṇikaitaṉ cūḻcciyiṉ pōyavaṉ
       viñcaiyaṉ vāḷiṉ viḷintōṉ eṉpatu
       neñcu naṭukkuṟak kēṭṭumey varunti
       mātavi makaḷtaṉai vāṉciṟai nīkkak
       kāvalaṉ tēvi kālkīḻ vīḻntuāṅku,
       aravuēr alkul aruntava maṭavār
       uravōṟku aḷitta orupat toruvarum,
       āyiram kaṇṇōṉ avinayam vaḻūukkoḷa
       māiru ñālattut tōṉṟiya aivarum,         24-10
       āṅkuavaṉ putalvaṉōṭu aruntavaṉ muṉinta
       ōṅkiya ciṟappiṉ orunūṟṟu nālvarum,
       tirukkiḷar maṇimuṭit tēvarkōṉ taṉmuṉ
       uruppaci muṉinta eṉkulattu oruttiyum,
       oṉṟu kaṭainiṉṟa āṟiru patiṉmarit
       toṉṟupaṭu mānakart tōṉṟiya nāḷmutal
       yāṉuṟu tuṉpam yāvarum paṭṭilar
       māperun tēvi mātar yāriṉum,
       pūvilai īttavaṉ poṉṟiṉaṉ eṉṟu
       mātavi mātavar paḷḷiyuḷ aṭaintatum,         24-20
       parantupaṭu maṉaitoṟum pāttiram ēnti
       araṅkak kūtticeṉṟu aiyam koṇṭatum
       nakutal allatu nāṭakak kaṇikaiyar
       takuti eṉṉār taṉmai aṉmaiyiṉ.
       maṉṉavaṉ makaṉē aṉṟiyum mātarāl
       innakar uṟūum iṭukkaṇum uṇṭāl
       umpaḷam taḻīiya uyarmaṇal neṭuṅkōṭṭup
       poṅkutirai ulāvum puṉṉaiyaṅ kāṉal
       kiḷarmaṇi neṭumuṭik kiḷḷi muṉṉā
       iḷavēṉil iṟuppa iṟumpūtu cāṉṟa         24-30
       pūnāṟu cōlai yārumil oruciṟait
       tāṉē tamiyaḷ orutti tōṉṟa,
       iṉṉaḷ ārkol īṅkuivaḷ eṉṟu
       maṉṉavaṉ aṟiyāṉ mayakkam eytāk
       kaṇṭa kaṇṇiṉum kēṭṭa ceviyiṉum
       kaṇṭa kaṇṇiṉum kēṭṭa ceviyiṉum
       uṟṟuuṇar uṭampiṉum veṟṟiccilaik kāmaṉ
       mayilaiyum ceyalaiyum māvum kuvaḷaiyum
       payilitaḻk kamalamum paruvattu alarnta
       malarvāy ampiṉ vācam kamaḻap         24-40
       palarpuṟam kaṇṭōṉ paṇintutoḻil kēṭpa
       orumati ellai kaḻippiṉum uraiyāḷ
       poruvaru pūṅkoṭi pōyiṉa annāḷ
       yāṅkuoḷit taṉaḷav iḷaṅkoṭi eṉṟē
       vēntarai aṭṭōṉ meliyal tērvuḻi,
       nilattil kuḷittu neṭuvicumpu ēṟic
       calattil tiriyumōr cāraṇaṉ tōṉṟa,
       maṉṉavaṉ avaṉai vaṇaṅki muṉniṉṟu
       eṉuyir aṉaiyāḷ īṅkuoḷit tāḷuḷaḷ
       aṉṉāḷ oruttiyaik kaṇṭirō aṭikaḷ         24-50
       collumiṉ eṉṟu toḻaavaṉ uraippāṉ:
       kaṇṭilēṉ āyiṉum kārikai taṉṉaip
       paṇṭuaṟi vuṭaiyēṉ pārttipa kēḷāy:
       nāka nāṭu naṭukkuiṉṟu āḷpavaṉ
       vākai vēlōṉ vaḷaivaṇaṉ tēvi
       vāca mayilai vayiṟṟuḷ tōṉṟiya
       pīlivaḷai eṉpōḷ piṟanta annāḷ
       iravikulattu oruvaṉ iṇaimulai tōyak
       karuvoṭu varumeṉak kaṇieṭuttu uraittaṉaṉ
       āṅkuap putalvaṉ varūum allatu         24-60
       pūṅkoṭi vārāḷ pulampal itukēḷ:
       tīvakac cānti ceyyā nāḷuṉ
       kāval mānakar kaṭalvayiṟu pukūum
       maṇimē kalaitaṉ vāymoḻi yālatu
       taṇiyātu intira cāpamuṇ ṭākaliṉ.
       āṅkuppati aḻitalum īṅkuppati keṭutalum
       vēntarai aṭṭōy meyeṉak koṇṭuik
       kācuil mānakar kaṭalvayiṟu pukāmal
       vācavaṉ viḻākkōḷ maṟavēl eṉṟu
       mātavaṉ pōyiṉa annāḷ toṭṭumik         24-70
       kāval mānakar kalakkuoḻi yātāl
       taṉpeyar maṭantai tuyaruṟu māyiṉ
       taṉperun teyvam varutalum uṇṭueṉa
       añciṉēṉ aracaṉ tēvieṉṟu ētti
       nalmaṉam piṟanta nāṭakak kaṇikaiyai
       eṉmaṉait tarukeṉa, irācamā tēvi
       kaḷḷum poyyum kāmamum kolaiyum
       uḷḷak kaḷavumeṉṟu uravōr tuṟantavai
       talaimaiyāk koṇṭaniṉ talaimaiil vāḻkkai
       pulaimaieṉṟu añcip pōnta pūṅkoṭi         24-80
       niṉṉoṭu pōntu niṉmaṉaip pukutāḷ
       eṉṉoṭu irukkumeṉṟu īṅkuivai colvuḻi,
       maṇimē kalaitiṟam mātavi kēṭṭut
       tuṇikayam tukaḷpaṭat tuvaṅkiya vatupōl
       teḷiyāc cintaiyaḷ cutamatikku uraittu
       vaḷieṟi kompiṉ varuntimeyn naṭuṅki
       aṟavaṇar aṭivīḻntu āṅkuavar tammuṭaṉ
       maṟavēl maṉṉavaṉ tēvitaṉ pālvarat
       tēviyum āyamum cittirā patiyum
       mātavi makaḷum mātavark kāṇṭalum         24-90
       eḻuntuetir ceṉṟuāṅku iṇaivaḷaik kaiyāl
       toḻuntakai mātavaṉ tuṇaiaṭi vaṇaṅka
       aṟivuuṇ ṭākaeṉṟu āṅkuavaṉ kūṟalum,
       iṇaivaḷai nallāḷ irācamā tēvi
       aruntavarkku amainta ācaṉam kāṭṭit
       tiruntuaṭi viḷakkic ciṟappuc ceytapiṉ
       yāṇṭupala pukkanum iṇaiaṭi varuntaeṉ
       kāṇtaku nalviṉai nummaiīṅku aḻaittatu
       nāttolaivu illāy āyiṉum taḷarntu
       mūttaiv yākkai vāḻkapal āṇṭueṉa,         24-100
       tēvi kēḷāy ceytava yākkaiyiṉ
       mēviṉēṉ āyiṉum vīḻkatir pōṉṟēṉ
       piṟantār mūttār piṇinōy uṟṟār
       iṟantār eṉkai iyalpē itukēḷ:
       pētaimai ceykai uṇarvē aruvuru
       vāyil ūṟē nukarvē vēṭkai
       paṟṟē pavamē tōṟṟam viṉaippayaṉ
       iṟṟueṉa vakutta iyalpuī rāṟum
       piṟantōr aṟiyil perumpēṟu aṟikuvar
       aṟiyār āyiṉ āḻnaraku aṟikuvar         24-110
       pētaimai eṉpatu yātueṉa viṉaviṉ
       ōtiya ivaṟṟai uṇarātu mayaṅki
       iyaṟpaṭu poruḷāl kaṇṭatu maṟantu
       muyalkōṭu uṇṭueṉak kēṭṭatu teḷital
       ulakam mūṉṟiṉum uyirām ulakam
       alakuil paluyir aṟuvakait tākum
       makkaḷum tēvarum piramarum narakarum
       tokka vilaṅkum pēyum eṉṟē
       nalviṉai tīviṉai eṉṟuiru vakaiyāl
       collap paṭṭa karuviṉuḷ tōṉṟi         24-120
       viṉaippayaṉ viḷaiyuṅ kālai uyirkaṭku
       maṉappēr iṉpamum kavalaiyum kāṭṭum
       tīviṉai eṉpatu yātueṉa viṉaviṉ
       āytoṭi nallāy āṅkuatu kēḷāy
       kolaiyē kaḷavē kāmat tīviḻaivu
       ulaiyā uṭampil tōṉṟuva mūṉṟum,
       poyyē kuṟaḷai kaṭuñcol payaṉil
       coleṉac collil tōṉṟuva nāṉkum,
       veḵkal vekuḷal pollāk kāṭcieṉṟu
       uḷḷam taṉṉiṉ uruppaṉa mūṉṟumeṉap         24-130
       pattu vakaiyāl payaṉteri pulavar
       ittiṟam paṭarār paṭarkuvar āyiṉ
       vilaṅkum pēyum narakarum ākik
       kalaṅkiya uḷḷak kavalaiyil tōṉṟuvar,
       nalviṉai eṉpatu yātueṉa viṉavil
       colliya pattiṉ tokutiyiṉ nīṅkic
       cīlam tāṅkit tāṉam talainiṉṟu
       mēleṉa vakutta orumūṉṟu tiṟattut
       tēvarum makkaḷum piramarum māki
       mēviya makiḻcci viṉaippayaṉ uṇkuvar         24-140
       aracaṉ tēviyoṭu āyiḻai nallīr
       puraitīr nalaṟam pōṟṟik kēṇmiṉ
       maṟupiṟappu uṇarnta maṇimē kalainī
       piṟaaṟam kēṭṭa piṉṉāḷ vantuuṉakku
       ittiṟam palavum ivaṟṟiṉ pakutiyum
       muttuēr nakaiyāy muṉṉuṟak kūṟuval
       eṉṟuavaṉ eḻutalum, iḷaṅkoṭi eḻuntu
       naṉṟuaṟi mātavaṉ nalaṭi vaṇaṅkit
       tēviyum āyamum cittirā patiyum
       mātavar nalmoḻi maṟavātu uymmiṉ         24-150
       innakar maruṅkiṉyāṉ uṟaivēṉ āyiṉ
       maṉṉavaṉ makaṟkuivaḷ varumkūṟṟu eṉkuvar
       aṭaintuataṉ piṉṉāḷ
       mācuil maṇipal lavamtoḻutu ētti
       vañciyuḷ pukku māpat tiṉitaṉakku
       eñcā nalaṟam yāṅkaṇum ceykuval
       eṉakkuiṭar uṇṭueṉṟu iraṅkal vēṇṭā
       maṉakkuiṉi yīreṉṟu avaraiyum vaṇaṅki,
       ventuuṟu poṉpōl vīḻkatir maṟainta
       anti mālai āyiḻai pōki         24-160
       ulaka aṟaviyum mutiyāḷ kuṭikaiyum
       ilakuoḷik kantamum ētti valamkoṇṭu
       antaram āṟāp paṟantuceṉṟu āyiḻai
       intiraṉ marumāṉ irumpatip puṟattuōr
       pūmpoḻil akavayiṉ iḻintu poṟaiuyirttu
       āṅkuvāḻ mātavaṉ aṭiiṇai vaṇaṅki,
       innakarp pēryātu innakar āḷum
       maṉṉavaṉ yāreṉa mātavaṉ kūṟum
       nāka puramitu nalnakar āḷvōṉ
       pūmican tiraṉmakaṉ puṇṇiya rācaṉ         24-170
       īṅkuivaṉ piṟanta annāḷ toṭṭum
       ōṅkuuyar vāṉattup peyalpiḻaippu aṟiyātu
       maṇṇum maraṉum vaḷampala tarūum
       uḷniṉṟu urukkum nōyuyirkku ileṉat
       takaimalart tārōṉ taṉtiṟam kūṟiṉaṉ
       nakaimalarp pūmpoḻil aruntavaṉ tāṉeṉ.
       āputtiraṉ nāṭu aṭainta kātai muṟṟiṟṟu.
       --------------

         Chapter 24. Manimekai is released from the queen’s prison
       Chitrāpathi, the mother of Mādhavi and grandmother of Manimekalai,
       after hearing that the prince had been caught in Chitrāpathi’s
       plan,
       went to queen’s palace to release Manimekalai.
       Her heart shivered and, suffering,
       she went to the queen, fell at her feet
       and asked her to release Manimekalai from prison.
       She said, “Many born as courtesans have had to suffer—
       the eleven lovely-waisted women,
       the five women born on the earth to dance for thousand-eyed Indra,
       24-010
       the renowned hundred and four who fought with the son of a sage,
       the girl from my family who opposed Urvasi,
       All these hundred and twenty women together
       did not suffer as I have.
       O great queen, the prince gave gold to many women
       and he is not here anymore. 24-020
       Mādhavi joined a Buddhist ashram and became a sage.
       Dancing women should not live like her.
       Manimekalai, her daughter, begs at every house
       carrying a begging pot.
       Women always cause trouble.
       Listen to this story,. 24-030
       Then Chitrāpathi told the queen the story
       of Killivalavan and Peelivalai.
       Chitrāpathi tells the queen the story of Nedumudikkilli, the father
       of Udayakumaran, and Peelivalai.
       “One time in the spring,
       the Chola king Nedumudikkilli, the father of Udayakumaran,
       went to the beautiful seashore with rolling waves
       where there is a flower garden filled with punnai trees.
       He saw a girl where there was no one around.
       The king thought, ‘I do not know who she is.
       Where did she come from?’
       He was fascinated by her.
       She was as beautiful as a peacock,
       with eyes like mangoes, ears like kuvalay flowers,
       and a mouth like a lotus petal.
       Her body spread fragrance like the flower arrows
       of Kama from his sugarcane bow. 24-040
       The king, conquerer of many enemies,
       affectionately asked her what she wanted.
       She and he stayed there for a whole month
       but she did not say anything about herself.
       One day he could not see her, lovely as a blooming vine.
       The king, conquerer of many enemies,
       went on his chariot slowly searching for her.
       At that time he saw a Jain sage climbing a hill to bathe in a pond.
       The king went before him, bowed to him and asked,
       ‘O sage, a girl as sweet to me as my life has disappeared.
       She may be here.
       Have you seen her? Please tell me.’ 24-050
       When the king bowed to him, the sage said,
       ‘I have not seen her, but I know of her, O king.
       Listen. She is the daughter Peelivalai,
       born to Valaivanan whose spear is victorious,
       the king of the Nāga country,
       and his wife Vāsa Mayilai.
       The day their daughter was born,
       an astrologer told the king and the queen
       that Peelivalai would love a prince of the Sun dynasty,
       and she would give birth to a boy. 24-060
       The astrologer also said that only their son will come to them
       and Peelivalai, beautiful as a blooming vine, would not come.
       Do not worry. Hear this.
       If you do not perform the Theevaga Shānthi,
       the ocean will swallow the great city that you protect.
       Even Manimekalai cannot prevent it
       because Indra has cursed this city.
       You have defeated many kings!
       Understand that this is true.
       Do not allow the ocean to swallow this wonderful city.
       Do not forget the festival for Indra.’
       The sage told this to the king
       and went on his way. 24-070
       From the time the great sage left this place,
       there has always been trouble in this guarded city.
       You are the queen of this land.
       I am afraid that if Manimekalai gets into trouble,
       the goddess Manimekalai, her guardian angel,
       will come here to save her and take her away.
       Manimekalai is a dancing girl and she was born to dance.
       Give her to me and I will take her to my home.” In this way,
       Chitrāpathi praised the queen
       and asked her to give Manimekalai to her.
       The queen Rajamādevi told Chitrāpathi,
       “Sages have removed from their lives
       drink, lying, passion, murder and theft.
       Manimekalai, beautiful as a blooming vine,
       followed the advice of those sages
       and renounced family life.
       She came to me and stays with me in this house.
       Let her remain with me.” After saying these things,
       the queen kept Manimekalai with her. 24-080
       Mādhavi, Sudhamathi and Aravanar go to bring Manimekalai from the
       queen’s palace.
       Mādhavi heard that Manimekalai was being kept by the queen.
       Her heart was affected like a cloth on which dust has fallen.
       She went to Sudhamathi and told her what she had heard,
       trembling like a blossoming vine in the wind.
       Mādhavi, Chitrāpathi and Sudhamathi go to see Aravanar
       Mādhavi went near Aravanar and bowed to his feet.
       He blessed all saying, “May you all be wise.”
       Rājamādevi the queen decorated with bangles,
       showed Aravanar a seat
       and showed proper reverence for his divine feet.
       She said, “I have not seen you for a long time.
       My good karma has allowed me to see you.
       May your venerable body live long!” 24-100
       Aravanar said, “Devi, listen.
       Even though I have led a life of penance,
       I am like the setting sun.
       This is the nature of the world—
       people are born, become old, get sick and die.
       Hear me. The results of karma are
       ignorance, action, feeling, form and lack of form, sense organs,
       taste,
       enjoyment, desire, attaching, life and birth.
       If people understand these things, they will reach moksha.
       If they do not understand them, they will plunge into hell. 24-110
       Aravanar said,
       “If you ask what it means to be naive [pedamai], 24-110
       it is when someone does not understand things,
       is confused and believes such things as ‘a rabbit has horns.’
       There are many kinds of lives born in this world.
       They are six types—people, gods, Brahmas, Naragars, animals and
       peys.
       They are all born according to their good karma and bad karma
       and experience happiness and sorrow
       when the results of their karma come to them. 24-120
       Would you know what bad karma is,
       O you adorned with beautiful bangles?
       Then hear. It is of ten kinds.
       These include three things you do with your body—
       murder, theft, and passion;
       four things you do with your mouth—
       lying, gossiping, saying cruel words, saying useless words;
       and three things you do with your mind—
       hatred, anger, and confusion.
       Good people avoid these,
       but if people do these things they will be born
       as animals, pey, naragar and will live with sorrow.
       If you would know what good karma is,
       it is the avoiding of the above ten acts,
       having good character and performing charity.
       Such people will be born again as gods, people and Brahmas
       and enjoy the results of their good karma. 24-140
       O queens, avoid all bad actions and do good karma.
       O Manimekalai, you know your births.
       When you know all the dharma,
       I will tell you all that you need to know.”
       After instructing them, Aravanar got up to leave.
       The young vine-like Manimekalai rose and bowed to his feet.
       She told the queen, attendants and Chitrāpathi,
       “Do not forget all the good things that Aravanar told us. 24-150 If
       I stay here all the people of this city
       will scold me saying that I was born to be a misfortune for the
       prince.
       I will go to the country of Punniyarājan,
       and from there I will reach the faultless island of Manipallavam.
       I will go to Vanji city, meet the goddess Kannagi, and do much good
       charity.
       Do not worry thinking that I will be in trouble
       You are dear to my heart.” 24-160
       She went around the temple of Muthiyāl
       filled with shining lights and fragrances.
       Then the ornamented Manimekalai flew up into the sky,
       went to the great city ruled by Indra’s nephew
       and stopped at a blooming grove.
       She rested, saw a sage, bowed to his feet and asked him,
       “What is the name of this city? Who is the king of this country?”
       The sage told her,
       “This city is Nāgapuram and the king of this country
       is Punniyarājan, the son of Bhumichandran.
       Ever since that son was born to king Bhumichandran
       the rains have not failed and the earth
       and the plants have flourished and yielded good fruit,
       and there is no sickness among the people.”
       The sage in that blooming garden
       told her the greatness of the king garlanded with flowers. 24-176

                    Part 6. Punniyarājan and Manimekalai
           25. āputtiraṉōṭu maṇipallavam aṭainta kātai
            [ maṇimēkalai āputtiraṉai maṇipallavattiṭai
       aḻaittup puttapīṭikaikāṭṭip piṟappu uṇarttiyatu ]

       aracaṉ urimaiyōṭu appoḻil pukuntu
       taruma cāvakaṉ taṉaṭi vaṇaṅki
       aṟaṉum maṟaṉum anittamum nittat
       tiṟaṉum tukkamum celuyirp pukkilum
       cārpil tōṟṟamum cārpuaṟuttu uytiyum
       āriyaṉ amaitiyum amaiuṟak kēṭṭup
       peṇṇiṇai illāp peruvaṉappu uṟṟāḷ
       kaṇiṇai iyakkamum kāmaṉōṭu iyaṅkā
       aṅkaiyil pāttiram koṇṭuaṟam kēṭkum
       iṅkuiṇai illāḷ ivaḷyār eṉṉa,         25-10
       kāvalaṉ toḻutu kañcukaṉ uraippōṉ
       nāvalam tīvilin naṅkaiyai oppār
       yāvarum illai ivaḷtiṟam ellām
       kiḷḷi vaḷavaṉoṭu keḻutakai vēṇṭik
       kaḷaviḻ tārōy kalattoṭum pōkik
       kāvirip paṭappai nalnakar pukkēṉ
       mātavaṉ aṟavaṇaṉ ivaḷpiṟappu uṇarntuāṅku
       ōtiṉaṉ eṉṟuyāṉ aṉṟē uraittēṉ
       āṅkuavaḷ ivaḷav akalnakar nīṅki
       īṅku vantaṉaḷ eṉṟalum iḷaṅkoṭi         25-20
       niṉkaip pāttiram eṉkaip pukuntatu
       maṉperuñ celvattu mayaṅkiṉai aṟiyāy
       appiṟappu aṟintilai āyiṉum āvayiṟṟu
       ippiṟappu aṟintilai eṉcey taṉaiyō
       maṇipal lavamvalam koṇṭāl allatu
       piṇippuuṟu piṟaviyiṉ peṟṟiyai aṟiyāy
       āṅku varuvāy aracanī eṉṟuap
       pūṅkamaḻ tārōṉ muṉṉarp pukaṉṟu
       maiaṟu vicumpiṉ maṭakkoṭi eḻuntu,
       veyyavaṉ kuṭapāl vīḻā muṉṉar         25-30
       vāṉniṉṟu iḻintu maṟitirai ulāvum
       pūnāṟu aṭaikarai eṅkaṇum pōki
       maṇipal lavamvalam koṇṭu maṭakkoṭi
       piṇippuaṟu mātavaṉ pīṭikai kāṇṭalum
       toḻutuvalam koḷḷaat tūmaṇip pīṭikaip
       paḻutuil kāṭci taṉpiṟappu uṇarttak urai
       kāyaṅ karaieṉum pēriyāṟṟu aṭaikarai
       māyamil mātavaṉ taṉaṭi paṇintu
       tarumam kēṭṭut tāḷtoḻutu ēttip
       perumakaṉ taṉṉoṭum peyarvōrkku ellām         25-40
       vilaṅkum narakarum pēykaḷum ākkum
       kalaṅkuañart tīviṉai kaṭimiṉ kaṭintāl
       tēvarum makkaḷum piramarum ākutir
       ākaliṉ nalviṉai ayarātu ōmpumiṉ
       pulavaṉ muḻutum poyiṉṟu uṇarntōṉ
       ulakuuyak kōṭaṟku oruvaṉ tōṉṟum
       annāḷ avaṉaṟam kēṭṭōr allatu
       iṉṉāp piṟavi iḻukkunar illai
       māṟṟuaruṅ kūṟṟam varuvataṉ muṉṉam
       pōṟṟumiṉ aṟameṉac cāṟṟik kāṭṭi         25-50
       nākkaṭip pāka vāyppaṟai aṟaintīr
       avvurai kēṭṭunum aṭitoḻutu ētta
       vevvurai eṅkaṭku viḷampiṉir ātaliṉ
       periyavaṉ tōṉṟā muṉṉarip pīṭikai
       kariyavaṉ iṭṭa kāraṇam tāṉum
       maṉperum pīṭikai māyntuuyir nīṅkiya
       eṉpiṟappu uṇarttalum eṉeṉṟu yāṉtoḻa
       muṟṟa uṇarnta mutalvaṉai allatu
       maṟṟap pīṭikai taṉmicaip poṟāatu
       pīṭikai poṟutta piṉṉar allatu         25-60
       vāṉavaṉ vaṇaṅkāṉ maṟṟuav vāṉavaṉ
       perumakaṟku amaittup piṟantār piṟaviyait
       taruma pīṭikai cāṟṟuka eṉṟē
       aruḷiṉaṉ ātaliṉ āyiḻai piṟaviyum
       iruḷaṟak kāṭṭum eṉṟueṭuttu uraittatu
       aṉṟē pōṉṟatu aruntavar vāymoḻi
       iṉṟueṉakku eṉṟē ētti valamkoṇṭu
       īṅkuivaḷ iṉṉaṇam āka, iṟaivaṉum
       āṅkuap poḻilviṭṭu akanakarpukkuta
       tantai muṉiyāt tāypacu vāka         25-70
       vanta piṟaviyum, māmuṉi aruḷāl
       kuṭarttoṭar mālai cūḻātu āṅkuōr
       aṭarppoṉ muṭṭaiyuḷ aṭaṅkiya vaṇṇamum,
       māmuṉi aruḷāl makkaḷai illōṉ
       pūmican tiraṉkoṭu pōnta vaṇṇamum,
       āytoṭi arivai amaracun tarieṉum
       tāyvāyk kēṭṭut tāḻtuyar eyti
       iṟanta piṟaviyiṉ yāycey tatūum
       piṟanta piṟaviyiṉ peṟṟiyum niṉaintu
       ceruvēl maṉṉar cevvipārttu uṇaṅka         25-80
       araicuvīṟ ṟiruntu puraiyōrp pēṇi
       nāṭakam kaṇṭu pāṭal pāṉmaiyil
       kēḷvi iṉṉicai kēṭṭut tēviyar
       ūṭal cevvi pārttunī ṭātu
       pāṭakat tāmaraic cīṟaṭi paṇintu
       tēmaru koṅkaiyil kuṅkumam eḻuti
       aṅkaiyil tuṟumalar curikuḻal cūṭṭi
       naṟumukai amiḻtuuṟūum tirunakai arunti
       matimukak karuṅkaṇ ceṅkaṭai kalakkak
       karuppu villi aruppukkaṇai tūvat         25-90
       tarukkiya kāmak kaḷḷāṭṭu ikaḻntu
       tūaṟat tuṟattal naṉṟueṉac cāṟṟit
       teḷinta nātaṉeṉ cevimutal iṭṭavittu
       ētam iṉṟāy iṉṟu viḷaintatu
       maṇimē kalaitāṉ kāraṇa mākaeṉṟu
       aṇimaṇi nīḷmuṭi aracaṉ kūṟa,
       maṉamvē ṟāyiṉaṉ maṉeṉa mantiri
       caṉamit tiraṉavaṉ tāḷtoḻutu ētti,
       emkō vāḻi eṉcol kēḷmati
       numkōṉ uṉṉaip peṟuvataṉ muṉṉāḷ         25-100
       paṉṉī rāṇṭuip patikeḻu nalnāṭu
       maṉuyir maṭiya maḻaivaḷam karantuīṅku
       īṉṟāḷ kuḻavikku iraṅkāḷ ākit
       tāṉtaṉi tiṉṉum takaimaiyatu āyatu urai
       kāyveṅ kōṭaiyil kārtōṉ ṟiyatueṉa
       nītōṉ ṟiṉaiyē niraittār aṇṇal
       tōṉṟiya piṉṉart tōṉṟiya uyirkaṭku
       vāṉam poyyātu maṇvaḷam piḻaiyātu
       ūṉuṭai uyirkaḷ uṟupaci aṟiyā
       nīoḻi kālai niṉnāṭu ellām         25-110
       tāyoḻi kuḻavi pōlak kūum
       tuyarnilai ulakam kāttal iṉṟinī
       uyarnilai ulakam vēṭṭaṉai āyiṉ
       iṟuti uyirkaḷ eytavum iṟaiva
       peṟuti virumpiṉai ākuvai aṉṟē
       taṉuyirkku iraṅkāṉ piṟauyir ōmpum
       maṉuyir mutalvaṉ aṟamumī taṉṟāl
       matimāṟu ōrntaṉai maṉṉava eṉṟē
       mutumoḻi kūṟa, mutalvaṉ kēṭṭu
       maṇipal lavamvalam koḷvataṟku eḻunta         25-120
       taṇiyā vēṭkai taṇittaṟku aritāl
       aracum urimaiyum akanakarc cuṟṟamum
       orumati ellai kāttalniṉ kaṭaṉeṉak
       kalamcey kammiyar varukeṉak kūuy
       ilaṅkunīrp puṇar eṟikarai eyti
       vaṅkam ēṟiṉaṉ maṇipal lavattiṭait
       taṅkātu akkalam ceṉṟucārntu iṟuttalum
       puraitīr kāṭcip pūṅkoṭi porunti
       araicaṉ kalameṉṟu akamakiḻvu eytik
       kāvalaṉ taṉṉoṭum kaṭaltirai ulāvum         25-130
       tēmalarc cōlait tīvakam valamceytu
       perumakaṉ kāṇāy piṟappuuṇar vikkum
       taruma pīṭikai itueṉak kāṭṭa,
       valaṅkoṇṭu ēttiṉaṉ maṉṉavaṉ maṉṉavaṟku
       ulanta piṟaviyai uyarmaṇip pīṭikai
       kaiyakattu eṭuttuk kāṇpōr mukattai
       maiaṟu maṇṭilam pōlak kāṭṭa urai
       eṉpiṟappu aṟintēṉ eṉiṭar tīrntēṉ
       teṉtamiḻ maturaic ceḻuṅkalaip pāvāy
       māri naṭunāḷ vayiṟukāy paciyāl         25-140
       āriruḷ añcātu ampalam aṇaintuāṅku
       irantuūṇ vāḻkkai eṉpāl vantōrkku
       aruntuūṇ kāṇātu aḻuṅkuvēṉ kaiyiṉ
       nāṭuvaṟam kūriṉumiv ōṭuvaṟam kūrātu
       ēṭā aḻiyal eḻuntuitu koḷkeṉa
       amuta curapi aṅkaiyil tantueṉ
       pavamaṟu vitta vāṉōr pāvāy!
       uṇarvil tōṉṟi uraipporuḷ uṇarttum
       aṇitikaḻ aviroḷi maṭantai niṉaṭi
       tēvar āyiṉum piramar āyiṉum         25 -150
       nāmācu kaḻūum nalamkiḷar tiruntuaṭi
       piṟanta piṟavikaḷ pēṇutal allatu
       maṟantu vāḻēṉ maṭantaieṉṟu ētti,
       maṉṉavaṉ maṇimē kalaiyuṭaṉ eḻuntu
       teṉmēṟ kākac ceṉṟu tiraiulām
       kōmuki eṉṉum poykaiyiṉ karaiōr
       tūmalarp puṉṉait tuṟainiḻal iruppa
       āput tiraṉōṭu āyiḻai iruntatu
       kāval teyvatam kaṇṭuuvantu eyti
       aruntuuyir maruntumuṉ aṅkaiyil koṇṭu         25-160
       peruntuyar tīrttaap periyōy vantaṉai
       annāḷ niṉṉai ayarttup pōyiṉar
       piṉnāḷ vantuniṉ peṟṟimai nōkki
       niṉkuṟi iruntu tamuyir nīttōr
       oṉpatu ceṭṭikaḷ uṭaleṉpu ivaikāṇ
       āṅkuavar iṭauṇṭu avaruṭaṉ vantōr
       ēṅkimey vaittōr eṉpum ivaikāṇ
       ūrtirai tokutta uyarmaṇal putaippa
       āymalarp puṉṉai aṇiniḻal kīḻāl
       aṉpuuṭai āruyir aracaṟku aruḷiya         25-170
       eṉpuuṭai yākkai iruntatu kāṇāy
       niṉuyir koṉṟāy niṉuyirkku iraṅkip
       piṉnāḷ vanta piṟaruyir koṟṟāy
       kolaivaṉ allaiyō koṟṟavaṉ āyiṉai.
       palartoḻu pāttiram kaiyiṉ ēntiya
       maṭavaral nallāy niṉtaṉ mānakar
       kaṭalvayiṟu pukkatu kāraṇam kēḷāy:
       nāka nalnāṭu āḷvōṉ taṉmakaḷ
       pīlivaḷai eṉpāḷ peṇṭiriṉ mikkōḷ
       paṉippakai vāṉavaṉ vaḻiyil tōṉṟiya         25-180
       puṉiṟṟuiḷaṅ kuḻaviyoṭu pūṅkoṭi poruntiit
       tīvakam valamceytu tēvarkōṉ iṭṭa
       māperum pīṭikai valaṅkoṇṭu ēttuḻi,
       kampaḷac ceṭṭi kalamvantu iṟuppa
       aṅkuavaṉ pālceṉṟu avaṉtiṟam aṟintu
       koṟṟavaṉ makaṉivaṉ koḷkeṉak koṭuttalum
       peṟṟa uvakaiyaṉ perumakiḻvu eytip
       paḻutuil kāṭcip paintoṭi putalvaṉait
       toḻutaṉaṉ vāṅkit tuṟaipiṟakku oḻiyak
       kalaṅkoṇṭu peyarnta aṉṟē kāriruḷ         25-190
       ilaṅkunīr aṭaikarai akkalam keṭṭatu
       keṭukala mākkaḷ putalvaṉaik keṭuttatu
       vaṭivēl kiḷḷi maṉṉaṉukku uraippa,
       maṉṉavaṉ makaṉukku uṟṟatu poṟāaṉ
       nalmaṇi iḻanta nākam pōṉṟu
       kāṉalum kaṭalum karaiyum tērvuḻi
       vāṉavaṉ viḻākkōḷ mānakar oḻintatu
       maṇimē kalāteyvam maṟṟuatu poṟāaḷ
       aṇinakar taṉṉai alaikaṭal koḷkeṉa
       iṭṭaṉaḷ cāpam paṭṭatu ituvāl         25-200
       kaṭavuḷ mānakar kaṭalkoḷap peyarnta
       vaṭivēl taṭakkai vāṉavaṉ pōla
       viritirai vantu viyaṉnakar viḻuṅka
       orutaṉi pōyiṉaṉ ulaka maṉṉavaṉ.
       aruntavaṉ taṉṉuṭaṉ āyiḻai tāyarum
       varuntātu ēki vañciyuḷ pukkaṉar
       parappunīrp pauvam palartoḻak kāppōḷ
       uraittaṉa kēṭka uṟukuvai āyiṉniṉ
       maṉuyir mutalvaṉai maṇimē kalāteyvam
       muṉṉāḷ eṭuttatum annāḷ āṅkuavaṉ         25-210
       aṟaaracu āṇṭatum aṟavaṇaṉ taṉpāl
       maṟupiṟap pāṭṭi vañciyuḷ kēṭpaieṉṟu
       antarat tīvakattu arunteyvam pōyapiṉ,
       maṉṉavaṉ iraṅki maṇimē kalaiyuṭaṉ
       tuṉṉiya tūmaṇal akaḻat tōṉṟi
       ūṉpiṇi aviḻavum uṭaleṉpu oṭuṅkit
       tāṉpiṇi aviḻāt takaimaiyatu āki
       veṇcutai vēyntuavaṉ irukkaiyiṉ irunta
       paṇpukoḷ yākkaiyiṉ paṭivam nōkki
       maṉṉavaṉ mayaṅka, maṇimē kalaieḻuntu         25-220
       eṉuṟ ṟaṉaiyō ilaṅkuitaḻt tārōy
       niṉnāṭu aṭaintuyāṉ niṉṉaiīṅku aḻaittatu
       maṉṉā niṉtaṉ maṟupiṟappu uṇartti
       antarat tīviṉum akaṉperun tīviṉum
       niṉpeyar niṟutta nīḷnilam āḷum
       aracar tāmē aruḷaṟam pūṇṭāl
       poruḷum uṇṭō piṟapurai tīrttaṟku
       aṟameṉap paṭuvatu yātueṉak kēṭpiṉ
       maṟavātu itukēḷ maṉuyirkku ellām
       uṇṭiyum uṭaiyum uṟaiyuḷum allatu         25-230
       kaṇṭatu ileṉa, kāvalaṉ uraikkuma
       eṉnāṭ ṭāyiṉum piṟarnāṭ ṭāyiṉum
       nalnutal uraitta nalaṟam ceykēṉ
       eṉpiṟappu uṇartti eṉṉainī paṭaittaṉai
       niṉtiṟam nīṅkal āṟṟēṉ yāṉeṉa,
       puṉkaṇ koḷḷalnī pōntataṟku iraṅkiniṉ
       maṉperu nāṭu vāyeṭuttu aḻaikkum
       vaṅkattu ēkuti vañciyuḷ celvaṉeṉṟu
       antarattu eḻuntaṉaḷ aṇiyiḻai tāṉeṉ.
       āputtiraṉōṭu maṇipallavam aṭaintakātai muṟṟiṟṟu.
       -----------

               Chapter 25. Punniyarājan goes to Manipallavam
       The powerful king Punniyarājan entered the garden
       and bowed to the feet of the sage Dharmasāvagan.
       The sage told him about good deeds, bad deeds,
       unstable things, stable things, and strength and sorrow in life.
       He also told the king
       how people are dependent on the bonds of this world
       and can reach moksha only if they release themselves from those
       bonds.
       The king saw Manimekalai and said to the sage,
       “This girl is very beautiful.
       Even Kāma will not be able to escape her loveliness,
       yet she carries a begging pot and asks for alms.
       Who is this matchless woman?” 25-010
       Kanjugan, his guard bowed to the king and said,
       “This female sage is matchless.
       No one has her abilities.
       O garlanded king from the dynasty of Killivalavan and as famous as
       he,
       when I came on a boat and entered a garden on the banks of the
       Kaviri.
       the sage Aravanar told me about her birth.
       At that time, I told you about her.
       This is that same girl.
       She has left her city and come here.” 25-020.
       Manimekalai sees Punniyarājan and speaks to him in his palace.
       Manimekalai, as lovely as a young vine,
       said to the king Punniyarājan adorned with garlands,
       “When you were Āputhiran you put the pot in Gomuki pond.
       You are not aware that the same pot came to me.
       You do not know its value
       and you do know of your previous birth
       or that your mother in this birth was a cow.
       I will be in Manipallavam waiting for you.
       Unless you come to me in Manipallavam
       and go around the Peedihai,
       you will not know about your previous birth.
       O king, come to me to that island.” 25-030
       Manimekalai in Manipallavam
       The faultless vine-like Manimekalai
       went to Manipallavam and waited for the king to come.
       She went along the banks of the river fragrant with flowers,
       where waves roll and waterfalls descend from the sky.
       Before the sun set,
       she saw the Buddha Peedihai that takes away desire for the world.
       She went around it, worshiped it and it told her previous births.
       Manimekalai repeats to the Peedihai what the sage Aravanar told her
       when she was on the banks of the Kāyankarai
       She said, “When I was on the banks of the river Kāyankarai
       and worshiped the sage Aravanar,
       I bowed and praised him and he taught the dharma.
       He told us all about the dharma.
       He said ‘Do not do bad acts and if you do bad karma
       you will be born as animals, Naragars and peys. 25-040
       If you do not do any bad karma
       you will be born as devas, people and Brahmas,
       and therefore you should never do bad acts
       but always do good.
       There is one who will be born to save the world,
       and only those who hear his dharma
       will not be born and suffer in this world.
       Do charitable deeds always before Yama comes for you.
       When Yama comes,
       you cannot change the results of your bad karma.’
       He taught us about dharma, speaking for a long time.
       We listened to the dharma that he taught us,
       bowed to him and praised him. 25-050
       I said, ‘I would like to know why the Peedihai is here
       even before the highest Buddha will appear.
       Will it tell the births of all?’
       Aravanar replied, ‘Only Indra knows what the Peedihai will say.
       It will not say anything unless the god Indra
       tells it what to say about the births of people.
       This Peedihai will also tell your births without fault.’” 25-060
       Manimekalai went around the Peedihai
       worshiped it and waited thinking
       that it would tell her previous births. 25-070
       The king Punniyarājan left the garden and went to his palace.
       He knew that he was born to a cow in his present birth.
       Bhumichandran, the childless king, had raised him as his son.
       He was upset when he found out from his stepmother Amarasundari
       that his mother Sāli had abandoned him
       as a baby in his previous birth. 25-080
       Punniyarājan no longer wanted to see plays or listen to music.
       He was not interested in love or fighting with his queens.
       He no longer bowed to the feet of women
       with breasts adorned with kunkum
       and with curly hair filled with flowers.
       He no longer desired their lovely smiles
       or the nectar of their mouths.
       He was not interested in the lovely glances
       of the dark eyes on their moonlike faces.
       Though Kama was shooting his flower arrows at him, 25-090
       the king wished to escape Kama’s play of passion.
       He understood that his mind was changing
       and he wanted to know his previous births.
       Manimekalai had told him to go to Manipallavam and worship the
       Peedihai
       which would tell him his previous births.
       Punniyarājan decides to go to Manipallavam to see Manimekalai
       Janamithran, the king’s minister, realized that the king’s mind
       had changed from what it was before.
       He bowed to the king and said,
       “May our king prosper! 25-100
       Hear my words.
       Before you were born, there was no rain in this country
       and people and creatures died.
       Mothers were not able to feed the children
       they had given birth to and also eat themselves.
       But when you were born,
       it was as if rain poured in the hot summer.
       O king adorned with long garlands,
       after you were born the rains always poured,
       the earth flourished without fail
       and the people were never hungry.
       If you go away, all the people of this country
       will suffer like motherless children. 25-110.
       If you wish to leave without protecting this country
       to do tapas and attain moksha,
       all the creatures here will die.
       Surely you do not want them to suffer and die.
       There is a saying that it is the dharma of a king
       not to worry about his life but to protect all other lives.
       This is the way you should think.” 25-120
       The king told his minister,
       “I cannot control my desire to go to Manipallavam.
       I will be back in a month
       and it is your duty to protect my country and people until I
       return.”
       He called his carpenters and asked them to build a boat.
       He sailed on the ocean rolling with shining waves
       and his boat reached Manipallavam.
       Punniyarājan and Manimekalai in Manipallavam
       Manimekalai saw the boat and was pleased to see the king.
       She took him around the island surrounded by the wavy ocean
       with its flower gardens dripping with honey. 25-130
       She showed him the Peedihai and said,
       “O great one, this is the Dharma Peedihai
       that tells people their previous births.”
       The king of kings went around the Peedihai and praised it.
       Just as a mirror shows a person’s face faultlessly
       when they hold it in their hands and look into it,
       the Peedihai showed the king his previous birth as Āputhiran.
       The king thinks of his previous birth when the goddess Sindādevi
       came to him and gave him the Amudhasurabhi
       He worshiped the goddess Sindādevi and said, “Now I know about my
       previous births.
       and my troubles are gone.
       O goddess lovely as a statue, 25-140
       you are the beautiful goddess of the Southern Tamil Madurai.
       O goddess Sindādevi, in my previous birth
       in the dark night when it was raining,
       some people came and asked for food,
       but I worried because I could not feed them in the middle of the
       night.
       O Sindādevi, you came to me and said,
       ‘Go to the temple and feed the people.
       Even if the country suffers from famine,
       this pot will not become empty.
       Get up, do not worry and receive this.’
       Then you gave me the Amudhasurabhi
       and removed all my sins so that I was able to feed hungry people.
       You, O goddess, shine like a diamond
       and your feet take away the faults of gods
       and Brahmas and give them goodness.
       I will not forget you in all my births.” 25-155
       With Manimekalai adorned with jewels,
       the king Punniyarājan went towards the southwest
       and they stayed on the bank of Gomuki pond
       in the shadow of a punnai tree blooming with pure flowers. 25-160
       Deepathilahai, the guardian goddess of the island,
       was pleased to see them and said to the king,
       “Come, O great one.
       You removed the hunger of people with your divine hands.
       You gave food from this wonderful Amudhasurabhi.
       Deepathilahai tells Punniyarājan the story of the nine Cheeti
       merchants and his former birth as Āputhiran
       In your previous birth,
       nine Cheeti merchants came with you on the ship
       and abandoned you on this island,
       but when they realized what a good person you were, they returned.
       Discovering you had died here, they died also—
       see, here are their bones. 25-170
       Their bodies were buried under the sand, pushed by rolling waves,
       under the shadow of this punnai tree blooming with flowers.
       These are the bodies that were sacrificed for their beloved king.
       Wanting to save your life, you killed others.
       Aren’t you a murderer? Yet you are a king now.” 25-175
       Deepathilahai tells Manimekalai the story of Peelivalai and
       Killivalavan.
       Deepathilahai looked at Manimekalai and spoke to her.
       “O good and beautiful one with the pot praised by all,
       hear why the ocean swallowed your city.
       Peelivalai, the most beautiful of women,
       was the daughter of the king of the Nāga country.
       Killivalavan met her in a forest and they loved each other.
       One day Peelivalai left him and went away
       and Killivalavan could not find her.
       Then she gave birth to a boy.
       One time as Peelivalai went around the island
       and the Peedihai that Indra, the king of gods, had placed there,
       she met a rug merchant whose boat had stopped there.
       She showed the baby to the merchant and told him,
       ‘This baby is the son of a king. Please take him with you.’
       When she gave him the baby he was happy
       and bowed to Peelivalai, beautiful as a faultless vine.
       The very day the merchant left with the baby, his ship sank.
       25-190.
       Some of the sailors who survived came to the king
       and told him about his son.
       The king, feeling like a snake that has lost its diamond,
       searched the forests and the shore of the ocean for his baby.
       He did not want to celebrate the festival of Indra, the king of the
       gods,
       and decided not to have it.
       The goddess Manimekalai, knowing about the king’s son,
       became angry and made a curse, saying,
       ‘May the beautiful city of Pukār be destroyed by the wavy ocean.’
       This is what happened to the city. 25-200
       The divine city Pukār was swallowed by the ocean and the king,
       who was like the god with the lovely spear in his hand,
       alone without anyone, left the city. 25-204
       Then your mothers adorned with ornaments
       went with the sage Aravanar to Vanji city.
       If you would know why the god of the ocean
       who makes the world flourish destroyed Pukār,
       ask the sage Aravanar in Vanji and he will tell you 25-210.
       how it happened.
       He will also tell you how the goddess Manimekalai
       took Āputhiran, the savior of the people, to another country
       and he became the king and ruled the place.”
       After saying this the divine goddess Deepathilahai
       went to her place.
       The king felt sad when he and Manimekalai dug up the earth
       and the skeletons of Āputhiran and the Chettis appeared.
       Manimekalai got up and said,
       “O king wearing a garland shining with petals,
       I came to your country and brought you here
       to tell you of your previous births.
       Is it right for rulers of the earth or the gods in the sky
       to decide to leave their country and become sages?
       If you would know what dharma is, listen carefully
       without forgetting what I say.
       There is nothing more important than food, clothes
       and a place to stay for creatures in this world.
       That is what dharma is.” 25-230
       The king told Manimekalai.
       “O you with a lovely forehead,
       whether in my own country or another country
       I will do good dharma.
       You told me my previous births
       and made me to understand who I am.
       I will never forget you.”
       Manimekalai told him,
       “Do not worry.
       Your good country worries that you are not there
       and calls you to come back. I am going to Vanji city.”
       Manimekalai with beautiful ornaments flew in the sky. 25-239.
       ---------
                           __________________________

                      26. vañci mānakar pukka kātai
[ maṇimēkalai kaṇṇakikkōṭṭam aṭaintu vañcimānakar pukka pāṭṭu ]

       aṇiyiḻai antaram āṟā eḻuntu
       taṇiyāk kātal tāykaṇ ṇakiyaiyum
       koṭaikeḻu tātai kōvalaṉ taṉṉaiyum
       kaṭavuḷ eḻutiya paṭimam kāṇiya
       vēṭkai turappak kōṭṭam pukuntu
       vaṇaṅki niṉṟu kuṇampala ētti
       aṟpukkaṭaṉ nillātu naltavam paṭarātu
       kaṟpukkaṭaṉ pūṇṭu numkaṭaṉ muṭittatu
       aruḷal vēṇṭumeṉṟu aḻutumuṉ niṟpa
       oruperum pattiṉik kaṭavuḷāṅku uraippōḷ         26-10
       emiṟaikku uṟṟa iṭukkaṇ poṟātu
       vemmaiyiṉ maturai vevvaḻal paṭunāḷ
       maturā patieṉum māperun teyvam
       itunīr muṉcey viṉaiyiṉ payaṉāl
       kācuil pūmpoḻil kaliṅkanal nāṭṭut
       tāya maṉṉavar vacuvum kumaraṉum
       ciṅka puramum ceḻunīrk kapilaiyum
       aṅkuāḷ kiṉṟōr aṭalceru uṟunāḷa
       mūiru kāvatam muṉṉunar iṉṟi
       yāvarum vaḻaṅkā iṭattil poruḷvēṭṭup         26-20
       palkalaṉ koṇṭu palaraṟi yāmala
       elvaḷai yāḷōṭu aripuram eytip
       paṇṭak kalampakar caṅkamaṉ taṉṉaik
       kaṇṭaṉar kūṟat taiyalniṉ kaṇavaṉ
       pārttipaṉ ṟoḻilceyum parataṉ eṉṉum
       tīttoḻi lāḷaṉ teṟṟeṉap paṟṟi
       oṟṟaṉ ivaṉeṉa uraittu maṉṉaṟkuk
       kuṟṟami lōṉaik kolaipurin tiṭṭaṉaṉ
       āṅkuavaṉ maṉaivi aḻutaṉaḷ araṟṟi
       ēṅkimey peyarppōḷ iṟuvarai ēṟi        26-30
       iṭṭa cāpam kaṭṭiyatu ākum
       ummai viṉaivantu uruttaloḻi yātueṉum
       meymmaik kiḷavi viḷampiya piṉṉum
       cīṟṟam koṇṭu ceḻunakar citaittēṉ
       mēlceynal viṉaiyiṉ viṇṇavarc ceṉṟēm
       avviṉai iṟutiyiṉ aṭuciṉap pāvam
       evvakai yāṉum eytutal oḻiyātu
       umpar ilvaḻi imparil palpiṟappu
       yāṅkaṇum iruviṉai uyttuumaip pōla
       nīṅkuarum piṟavik kaṭaliṭai nīntip         26-40
       piṟantum iṟantum uḻalvōm piṉṉar
       maṟantum maḻaimaṟā makatanal nāṭṭukku
       oruperun tilakameṉṟu uravōr uraikkum
       karavuarum perumaik kapilaiyam patiyiṉ
       aḷappuarum pāramitai aḷaviṉṟu niṟaittut
       tuḷakkamil putta ñāyiṟu tōṉṟip
       pōti mūlam poruntivan taruḷit
       tītuaṟu nālvakai vāymaiyum terintu
       paṉṉiru cārpiṉ pakutit tōṟṟamum
       annilai ellām aḻivuṟu vakaiyum         26-50
       iṟṟueṉa iyampik kuṟṟavīṭu eyti
       eṇarum cakkara vāḷam eṅkaṇum
       aṇṇal aṟakkatir virikkum kālaip
       paintoṭi tantai yuṭaṉē pakavaṉa
       intira vikāram ēḻumēt tutaliṉ
       tuṉpak katiyil tōṟṟaravu iṉṟi
       aṉpuuṟu maṉattōṭu avaṉaṟam kēṭṭut
       tuṟavi uḷḷam tōṉṟit toṭarum
       piṟavi nītta peṟṟiyam ākuvam
       attiṟa māyiṉum anēka kālam         26-60
       ettiṟat tārkkum iruttiyum ceykuvam.
       naṟaikamaḻ kūntal naṅkai nīyum
       muṟaimaiyiṉ inta mūtūr akattē
       avvavar camayattu aṟiporuḷ kēṭṭu
       meyvakai iṉmai niṉakkē viḷaṅkiya
       piṉṉarp periyōṉ piṭakaneṟi kaṭavāy
       iṉṉatuivvi yalpueṉat tāyeṭuttu uraittalum,
       iḷaiyaḷ vaḷaiyōḷ eṉṟuuṉakku yāvarum
       viḷaiporuḷ uraiyār vēṟṟuuruk koḷkeṉa
       maiaṟu ciṟappiṉ teyvatam tanta         26-70
       mantiram ōtiōr mātavaṉ vaṭivāyt
       tēva kulamum teṟṟiyum paḷḷiyum
       pūmalarp poḻilum poykaiyum miṭaintu
       naltava muṉivarum kaṟṟuaṭaṅ kiṉarum
       nalneṟi kāṇiya tolnūl pulavarum
       eṅkaṇum viḷaṅkiya eyilpuṟa irukkaiyil,
       ceṅkuṭ ṭuvaṉeṉum ceṅkōl vēntaṉ
       pūtta vañci pūvā vañciyil
       pōrttoḻil tāṉai kuñciyil puṉaiya
       nilanāṭu ellaitaṉ malaināṭu eṉṉak         26-80
       kaimmalaik kaḷiṟṟuiṉam tammuḷ mayaṅkat
       tērum māvum ceṟikaḻal maṟavarum
       kārmayaṅku kaṭaliṉ kalikoḷak kaṭaiik
       kaṅkaiyam pēryāṟṟu aṭaikarait taṅki
       vaṅka nāviyiṉ ataṉvaṭakku iḻintu
       kaṉaka vicayar mutalpala vēntar
       aṉaivarai veṉṟuavar ampoṉ muṭimicaic
       cimaiyam ōṅkiya imaiya mālvarait
       teyvak kallum taṉtiru muṭimicaic
       ceypoṉ vākaiyum cērttiya cēraṉ         26-90
       viltiṟal veyyōṉ taṉpukaḻ viḷaṅkap
       poṉkoṭip peyarppaṭūum poṉnakarp polintaṉaḷ
       tiruntunal ētu mutirntuḷatu ātaliṉ
       poruntunāl vāymaiyum pulappaṭut taṟkueṉ.
       vañci mānakar pukka kātai muṟṟiṟṟu.
       ---------

     Chapter 26. Manimekalai meets the goddess Kannagi. She enters Vanji
                                    city
       The story of Kannagi
       Manimekalai adorned with beautiful ornaments flew in the sky.
       She wanted to see the statues of her beloved parents—
       her generous father Kovalan and her mother Kannagi.
       She entered the temple and saw their statues.
       She worshiped the goddess Kannagi and praised her.
       Crying, she said,
       “You did not have a loving family life, you did not do tapas.
       Tell me why you spent your life like that.”
       Kannagi, the most chaste woman, tells Manimekalai her story
       She bowed and the statue of Kannagi,
       the goddess of chastity, spoke to her, saying, 26-010
       “When your father and I were in Madurai
       I could not endure the suffering he went through
       and I burned Madurai.
       At that time a goddess came to me
       and told me that all that had happened
       is because of my previous karma.
       I will tell you the story of my previous life.
       The Goddess Kannagi tells the story of Sangaman.
       Two related kings, Vasu and Kumaran,
       ruled Singapuram and fertile Kabilai,
       and they fought with one another.
       In my previous birth I was married to Sangaman.
       During their fighting, Sangaman and I
       took our ornaments and went to Singapuram to sell them. 26-020
       The guards of the king saw Sangaman selling ornaments,
       went to the palace and told an evil person named Bharathan,
       that Sangaman is a thief.
       Bharathan went to the king and told him that Sangaman is a spy,
       and the king had Sangaman killed.
       I, Sangaman’s wife,
       cried and climbed high on a hill and uttered a curse. 26-030
       The goddess Madhurāpuri came before me and said,
       ‘Do not curse the city.
       That evil deed will bring you punishment.’
       I did not listen to the goddess
       but became angry and destroyed the city.
       Now, your father and I are in heaven
       because of our good karma,
       but though we are here now
       our bad karma will not leave us.
       We will be born many times in the world,
       and suffer like all others.” 26-040
       The goddess Kannagi continued,
       “In Kapilavastu in the country of Magadam,
       a sun-like Buddha will appear beneath a bodhi tree.
       It will tell the faultless four kinds of truth,
       the appearance of twelve causes of misery
       and how they will appear and disappear.
       Chakravālam will appear 26-050
       and spread the light of Dharma.
       O you adorned with beautiful bracelets,
       because we have worshiped at the seven temples of Indra,
       I and your father will not be born in sorrowful births.
       With loving hearts we will listen to the Buddha’s dharma
       and our hearts will follow the path of sages.
       We will not be born in the world after that.
       We will serve all people. 26-060
       O you with fragrant hair,
       you will hear all the religious beliefs of the philosophers in this
       city.
       When you understand the truth,
       you will follow the lord’s path of Buddhist teaching.
       This is what will happen to you.
       The sages will not tell religious truths to you
       because they will think you are young
       and you are a woman wearing bangles.
       You must take another form.” 26-070
       Kannagi her foster mother left Manimekalai and went away.
       Manimekalai in Vanji city
       Manimekalai recited the mantra
       that the goddess Manimekalai had given her
       and assumed the form of a male sage.
       She passed by temples, porches, ashrams,
       blooming groves and ponds.
       She stayed in the area outside of Vanji city and the forts,
       where sages doing tapas stay along with learned scholars,
       and poets who know ancient books that guide people in good paths.
       The victory of Cenkuttuvan, the Chera king, in the war
       with the northern Kanaga Vijayars.
       Cenkuttuvan, the just king of Vanji, was preparing to go to war.
       His Chera soldiers wore blooming vanji flowers in their hair,
       while his throng of mountain-like elephants
       went among the people swinging their trunks.
       It looked as if the Chera army covered all the hilly land. 26-080
       As they moved, chariots, horses
       and soldiers wearing heroic anklets
       sounded like the ocean in the rainy season.
       They stopped at the northern bank of the beautiful Ganges
       and then crossed the river to reach the land of the kings Kanaga
       Vijayar.
       They fought with them and other enemy kings, defeated them
       and made them carry divine stones on their royal heads
       to make a statue of the goddess Kannagi.
       For his valor he received the golden vahai flower,
       a symbol of victory, on his crown.
       Manimekalai entered golden Vanji where gold banners waved
       to celebrate the victory of the Chera king, the great archer.
       26-094.
       ---------
                           __________________________

                        Part 7. Manimekalai’s tapas
             27. camayakkaṇakkartam tiṟam kēṭṭa kātai
[ vañcimānakarppuṟattuc camayakkaṇakkar tam tiṟamkēṭṭa pāṭṭu ]

       navaiaṟu naṉporuḷ uraimi ṉōeṉac
       camayak kaṇakkar tamtiṟam cārntu
       vaitika mārkkattu aḷavai vātiyai
       eytiṉaḷ eytiniṉ kaṭaippiṭi iyampueṉa,
       vēta viyātaṉum kiruta kōṭiyum
       ētamil caimiṉi eṉumiv āciriyar
       pattum eṭṭum āṟum paṇpuuṟat
       tattam vakaiyāl tāmpakarn tiṭṭaṉar
       kāṇṭal karutal uvamam ākamam
       āṇṭaiya aruttā pattiyōṭu iyalpu        27-10
       aitikam apāvam mīṭci oḻivaṟivu
       eytiuṇ ṭāmneṟi eṉṟuivai tammāl
       poruḷiṉ uṇmai pulamkoḷal vēṇṭum
       maruḷil kāṭci aivakai ākum
       kaṇṇāl vaṇṇamum ceviyāl ōcaiyum
       naṇṇiya mūkkāl nāṟṟamum nāvāl
       cuvaiyum meyyāl ūṟumeṉac coṉṉa
       ivaiivai kaṇṭukēṭṭu uyirttuuṇṭu uṟṟut
       tukkamum cukamum eṉattuyakku aṟaaṟintu
       uyirum vāyilum maṉamumūṟu iṉṟip         27-20
       payiloḷi yoṭuporuḷ iṭampaḻutu iṉṟic
       cuṭṭal tirital kavarkōṭal tōṉṟātu
       kiṭṭiya tēca nāmam cāti
       kuṇamkiri yaiyiṉ aṟivatu ākum.
       karuttuaḷa vāvatu
       kuṟikkoḷ aṉumā ṉattuaṉu mēyat
       takaimai uṇarum taṉmaiyatu ākum.
       mūvakai uṟṟuatu potueccam mutalām
       potueṉap paṭuvatu cātaṉa cāttiyam
       ivaian nuvayam iṉṟāy iruntum         27-30
       kaṭamtikaḻ yāṉaik kāṉavoli kēṭṭōṉ
       uṭaṅkueḻil yāṉaiaṅku uṇṭueṉa uṇartal
       eccam eṉpatu veḷḷaē tuviṉāl
       niccayittu attalai maḻainikaḻvu uraittal
       mutaleṉa moḻivatu karukkoḷ mukilkaṇṭu
       itumaḻai peyyum eṉaiyam piṭutal
       eṉṉum ētuviṉ oṉṟumuk kālam
       taṉṉil oṉṟil cārntuuḷatu āki
       māṇṭa uyirmutal mācuiṉṟu ākik
       kāṇṭal poruḷāl kaṇṭilatu uṇartal         27-40
       uvamam āvatu oppumai aḷavai
       kavaya māāp pōlumeṉak karutal;
       ākama aḷavai aṟivaṉ nūlāl
       pōka puvaṉam uṇṭueṉap pulamkoḷal;
       aruttā patti āykkuṭi kaṅkai
       irukkum eṉṟāl karaiyileṉṟu eṇṇal
       iyalpu yāṉaimēl iruntōṉ tōṭṭikku
       ayaloṉṟu īyātu atuvē koṭuttal urai
       aitikam eṉpatu ulakuurai immarattu
       eytiyatu ōrpēy uṇṭueṉat teḷital         27-50
       apāvam eṉpatu iṉmaiōr poruḷait
       tavātuav viṭattut tāṉilai eṉṟal
       mīṭci eṉpatu irāmaṉveṉ ṟāṉeṉa
       māṭciil irāvaṇaṉ tōṟṟamai matittal
       uḷḷaneṟi eṉpatu nārācat tirivil
       koḷḷat takuvatu kāntameṉak kūṟal
       eṭṭuuḷa piramā ṇāpā caṅkaḷ
       cuṭṭuṇar voṭutiri yakkōṭal aiyam
       tērātu teḷital kaṇṭuṇa rāmai
       eytum ilvaḻakku uṇarntatai uṇartal         27-60
       niṉaippueṉa nikaḻvacuṭṭu uṇarveṉap paṭuvatu
       eṉaipporuḷ uṇmai māttirai kāṇṭal
       tiriyak kōṭal oṉṟaioṉṟu eṉṟal
       virikatir ippiyai veḷḷieṉṟu uṇartal
       aiyam eṉpatu oṉṟai niccayiyā
       maiyal taṟiyō makaṉō eṉṟal
       tērātu teḷital ceṇṭu veḷiyil
       ōrātu taṟiyai makaṉeṉa uṇartal
       kaṇṭuṇa rāmai kaṭumāp pulioṉṟu
       aṇṭalai mutaliya kaṇṭumaṟi yāmai         27-70
       ilvaḻakku eṉpatu muyalkōṭu oppaṉa
       colliṉmāt tirattāl karuttil tōṉṟal
       uṇarntatai uṇartal uṟupaṉik kuttīp
       puṇarntiṭal maruntueṉap pulamkoḷa niṉaittal
       niṉaippueṉap paṭuvatu kāraṇam nikaḻātu
       niṉakkuivar tāyum tantaiyum eṉṟu
       piṟarcolak karutalip peṟṟiya aḷavaikaḷ.
       pāṅkuṟum ulōkā yatamē pauttam
       cāṅkiyam naiyā yikamvai cēṭikam
       mīmāñ cakamām camayaā ciriyar         27-80
       tāmpiru kaṟpati ciṉaṉē kapilaṉ
       akka pātaṉ kaṇātaṉ caimiṉi
       meyppirat tiyaaṉu māṉam cāttam
       uvamāṉam aruttā patti apāvam
       ivaiyē ippōtu iyaṉṟuḷa aḷavaikaḷ
       eṉṟavaṉ taṉṉaiviṭṭu, iṟaivaṉ īcaṉeṉa
       niṉṟa caiva vātinēr paṭutalum
       paracuniṉ teyvam eppaṭittu eṉṉa
       irucuṭa rōṭuiya māṉaṉaim pūtameṉṟu
       eṭṭu vakaiyum uyirumyāk kaiyumāyk         27-90
       kaṭṭiniṟ pōṉum kalaiuruvi ṉōṉum
       paṭaittuviḷai yāṭum paṇpi ṉōṉum
       tuṭaittut tuyartīr tōṟṟat tōṉum
       taṉṉil vēṟu tāṉoṉṟu ilōṉum
       aṉṉōṉ iṟaivaṉ ākumeṉṟu uraittaṉaṉ
       pērulaku ellām pirama vātiōr
       tēvaṉ iṭṭa muṭṭai eṉṟaṉaṉ.
       kātal koṇṭu kaṭalvaṇaṉ purāṇam
       ōtiṉaṉ naraṇaṉ kāppueṉṟu uraittaṉaṉ.
       kaṟpam kaican tamkāl eṇkaṇ         27-100
       teṟṟeṉ niruttam cevicik kaimūkku
       uṟṟa viyākara ṇamukam peṟṟuc
       cārpiṉ tōṉṟā āraṇa vētakku
       āti antam illaiatu neṟieṉum
       vētiyaṉ uraiyiṉ vitiyum kēṭṭu
       meyttiṟam vaḻakkueṉa viḷampukiṉṟa
       ettiṟat tiṉumicai yātuivar uraieṉa
       ācī vakanūl aṟinta purāṇaṉaip
       pēcumniṉ iṟaiyār nūlporuḷ yātueṉa,
       ellaiil poruḷkaḷil eṅkumep poḻutum        27-110
       pullik kiṭantu pulappaṭu kiṉṟa
       varampuil aṟivaṉ iṟainūl poruḷkaḷaintu
       uramtarum uyirōṭu orunāl vakaiaṇu
       avvaṇu uṟṟum kaṇṭum uṇarntiṭap
       peyvakai kūṭip pirivatum ceyyum
       nilamnīr tīkāṟṟu eṉanāl vakaiyiṉa
       malaimaram uṭampueṉat tiraḷvatum ceyyum
       vevvēṟu āki virivatum ceyyum
       avvakai aṟivatu uyireṉap paṭumē.
       vaṟpam āki uṟunilam tāḻntu         27-120
       colpaṭu cītat toṭucuvai uṭaittāy
       iḻiṉeṉa nilamcērntu āḻvatu nīrtīt
       teṟutalum mēlcēr iyalpum uṭaittām
       kāṟṟu vilaṅki acaittal kaṭaṉivai
       vēṟṟuiyalpu eytum viparī tattāl
       āti illāp paramā ṇukkaḷ
       tītuuṟṟu yāvatum citaivatu ceyyā
       putitāyp piṟantuoṉṟu oṉṟil pukutā
       mutunīr aṇunila aṇuvāyt tiriyā
       oṉṟiraṇ ṭākip piḷappatum ceyyā         27-130
       aṉṟiyum avalpōl parappatum ceyyā
       ulāvum tāḻum uyarvatum ceyyum
       kulāmalai piṟavāk kūṭum palavum
       piṉṉaiyum pirintutam taṉmaiya ākum
       maṉṉiya vayiramāyc ceṟintuvaṟ pamumām
       vēyāyt tuḷaipaṭum poruḷā muḷaikkum
       tēyā matipōl ceḻunila varaippām
       niṟaintaiv aṇukkaḷ pūtamāy nikaḻiṉ
       kuṟaintum ottum kūṭā varicaiyiṉ
       oṉṟu mukkāl araikā lāyuṟum         27-140
       tuṉṟummik kataṉāl peyarcolap paṭumē
       ikkuṇattu aṭaintāl allatu nilaṉāyc
       cikkeṉ patuvum nīrāy iḻivatum
       tīyāyc cuṭuvatum kāṟṟāy vīcalum
       āya toḻilai aṭaintiṭa māṭṭā
       ōraṇut teyvak kaṇṇōr uṇarkuvar
       tērār pūtat tiraṭciyuḷ ēṉōr
       mālaip pōtil orumayir aṟiyār
       cālat tiraḷmayir tōṟṟutal cālum
       karumm piṟappum karunīlap piṟappum         27-150
       pacumm piṟappum cemm piṟappum
       poṉṉ piṟappum veṇṇ piṟappum
       eṉaṟuiv vāṟu piṟappiṉum mēvip
       paṇpuuṟu varicaiyiṟ pālpaṭṭup piṟantōr
       kaḻiveṇ piṟappil kalantuvīṭu aṇaikuvar
       aḻiyal vēṇṭār atuuṟaṟ pālār
       itucem pōkkiṉ iyalpuitu tappum
       atumaṇ ṭalameṉṟu aṟiyal vēṇṭum
       peṟutalum iḻattalum iṭaiyūṟu uṟutalum
       uṟumiṭattu eytalum tukkacukam uṟutalum         27-160
       peritavai nīṅkalum piṟattalum cātalum
       karuvil paṭṭa poḻutē kalakkum
       iṉpamum tuṉpamum ivaiyumaṇu eṉattakum
       muṉuḷa ūḻē piṉṉumuṟu vippatu
       maṟkali nūliṉ vakaiitu eṉṉa,
       coltaṭu māṟṟat toṭarcciyai viṭṭu
       nikaṇṭa vātiyai nīurai niṉṉāl
       pukaḻum talaivaṉyār nūlporuḷ yāvai
       apporuḷ nikaḻvum kaṭṭum vīṭum
       meyppaṭa viḷampueṉa, viḷampal uṟuvōṉ         27-170
       intirar toḻappaṭum iṟaivaṉem iṟaivaṉ
       tanta nūlporuḷ taṉmātti kāyamum
       ataṉmātti kāyamum kālā kāyamum
       tītuil cīvaṉum paramā ṇukkaḷum
       nalviṉai yumtī viṉaiyumav viṉaiyāl
       ceyvuṟu pantamum vīṭumit tiṟatta
       āṉṟa poruḷtaṉ taṉmaiya tāyum
       tōṉṟucārvu oṉṟiṉ taṉmaiya tāyum
       anittamum nittamum āki niṉṟu
       nuṉitta kuṇattuōr kaṇattiṉ kaṇṇē         27-180
       tōṟṟamum nilaiyum kēṭum eṉṉum
       māṟṟuaru mūṉṟum ākkalum urittām urai
       nimpam muḷaittu nikaḻtal anittiyam
       nimpattu apporuḷ aṉmai anittiyam
       payaṟṟut taṉmai keṭātukum māyam
       iyaṟṟi appayaṟu aḻitalum ētut
       tarumātti kāyam tāṉeṅkum uḷatāyp
       poruḷkaḷai naṭattum porunta nittiyamā
       appaṭit tākiya taṉmātti kāyamum
       epporuḷ kaḷaiyum niṟuttal iyaṟṟum         27-190
       kālam kaṇikam eṉumkuṟu nikaḻcciyum
       ēlum kaṟpat tiṉneṭu nikaḻcciyum
       ākkumā kāyam ellāp poruṭkum
       pūkkumiṭam koṭukkum puriviṟṟu ākum
       cīvaṉ uṭampōṭu ottuk kūṭit
       tāilcuvai mutaliya pulaṉkaḷai nukarum
       ōraṇu puṟkalam puṟavuru vākum
       cīrcāl nalviṉai tīviṉai avaiceyum
       varuvaḻi iraṇṭaiyum māṟṟi muṉcey
       aruviṉaip payaṉaṉu pavittuaṟut tiṭutal         27-200
       atuvīṭu ākum eṉṟaṉaṉ, avaṉpiṉ
       itucāṅ kiyamatam eṉṟueṭuttu uraippōṉ
       taṉaiaṟivu aritāyt tāṉmuk kuṇamāy
       maṉanikaḻvu iṉṟi māṇpuamai potuvāy
       ellāp poruḷum tōṉṟutaṟku iṭameṉac
       collutal mūlap pakuticit tattu
       māṉeṉṟu uraitta putti veḷippaṭṭu
       ataṉkaṇā kāyam veḷippaṭ ṭataṉkaṇ
       vāyu veḷippaṭṭu ataṉkaṇ aṅki
       yāṉatu veḷippaṭṭu ataṉkaṇ appiṉ         27-210
       taṉmai veḷippaṭṭu atilmaṇ veḷippaṭṭu
       avaṟṟiṉ kūṭṭat tiṉmaṉam veḷippaṭṭu
       ārppuuṟu maṉattuāṅ kāra vikāramum
       ākā yattil cevioli vikāramum
       vāyuvil tokkum ūṟueṉum vikāramum
       aṅkiyil kaṇṇum oḷiyumām vikāramum
       taṅkiya appilvāy cuvaieṉum vikāramum
       nilakkaṇ mūkku nāṟṟa vikāramum
       colappaṭṭu ivaṟṟiṉ tokku vikāramāy
       vākkup pāṇipāta pāyuruupat tameṉa         27-220
       ākkiya ivaiveḷip paṭṭuiṅku aṟainta
       pūta vikārat tālmalai marammutal
       ōtiya veḷippaṭṭu ulakāy nikaḻntu
       vanta vaḻiyē ivaiceṉṟu aṭaṅki
       antamil piraḷaya māyiṟum aḷavum
       oṉṟāy eṅkum parantunit tiyamām
       aṟitaṟku eḷitāy mukkuṇam aṉṟip
       poṟiuṇar vikkum potuvum aṉṟip
       epporu ḷumtōṉ ṟutaṟkuiṭam aṉṟi
       apporuḷ ellām aṟintiṭaṟku uṇarvāy         27-230
       oṉṟāy eṅkum parantunit tiyamāy
       niṉṟuuḷa uṇarvāy nikaḻtarum puruṭaṉ
       pulamār poruḷkaḷ irupat taintuuḷa
       nilanīr tīvaḷi ākā yammē
       meyvāy kaṇmūk kuccevi tāmē
       uṟucuvai oḷiūṟu ōcaināṟ ṟammē
       vākkup pāṇi pātapāyu rupattam
       ākkum maṉōputti āṅkāra cittam
       uyireṉum āṉmā oṉṟoṭum āmeṉac
       ceyiraṟac ceppiya tiṟamum kēṭṭu,         27-240
       vaicē ṭikaniṉ vaḻakkuurai eṉṉap
       poytīr poruḷum kuṇamum karumamum
       cāmā ṉiyamum vicēṭamum kūṭṭamum
       āmāṟu kūṟum atilporuḷ eṉpatu
       kuṇamum toḻilum uṭaittāy ettokaip
       poruḷukkum ētuvām apporuḷ oṉpāṉ
       ñālamnīr tīvaḷi ākā yamticai
       kālam āṉmā maṉamivaṟ ṟuḷnilam
       oliūṟu niṟamcuvai nāṟṟamoṭu aintum
       payilkuṇam uṭaittu niṉṟa nāṉkum         27-250
       cuvaimutal orōkuṇam avaikuṟaivu uṭaiya
       ōcai ūṟu niṟamnāṟ ṟamcuvai
       mācuil perumai ciṟumai vaṉmai
       meṉmai cīrmai noymmai vaṭivam
       eṉṉum nīrmai pakkammutal aṉēkam
       kaṇṇiya poruḷiṉ kuṇaṅkaḷ ākum.
       poruḷum kuṇamum karumam iyaṟṟaṟku
       uriya uṇmai tarummutal pōtuttāṉ
       pōtalum niṟṟalum potukkuṇam ātaliṉ
       cātalum nikaḻtalum apporuḷ taṉmai         27-260
       oṉṟuaṇu kūṭṭam kuṇamum kuṇiyumeṉṟu
       oṉṟiya vātiyum uraittaṉaṉ, uṭaṉē
       pūta vātiyaip pukalnī eṉṉat
       tātakip pūvum kaṭṭiyum iṭṭu
       maṟṟum kūṭṭa matukkaḷi piṟantuāṅku
       uṟṟiṭum pūtattu uṇarvu tōṉṟiṭum
       avvuṇarvu avvap pūtattu aḻivukaḷiṉ
       vevvēṟu piriyum paṟaiō caiyilkeṭum
       uyiroṭum kūṭṭiya uṇarvuṭaip pūtamum
       uyiril lāta uṇarvuil pūtamum         27-270
       avvap pūta vaḻiavai piṟakkum
       meyvakai ituvē vēṟuurai vikaṟpamum
       uṇmaip poruḷum ulōkāyataṉ uṇarvē
       kaṇkūṭu allatu karuttaḷavu aḻiyum
       immaiyum immaip payaṉumip piṟappē
       poymmai maṟumaiuṇ ṭāyviṉai tuyttal
       eṉṟalum ellā mārkkamum kēṭṭu
       naṉṟuala āyiṉum nāṉmāṟu uraikkilēṉ
       piṟantamuṟ piṟappai eytap peṟutaliṉ
       aṟintōr uṇṭō eṉṟunak kiṭutalum        27-280
       teyva mayakkiṉum kaṉāuṟu tiṟattiṉum
       maiyal uṟuvōr maṉamvē ṟāmvakai
       aiya aṉṟi illaiyeṉ ṟalumniṉ
       tantaitā yaraiaṉu māṉat tālalatu
       inta ñālattu evvakai aṟivāy
       meyuṇarvu iṉṟimeyp poruḷuṇarvu ariya
       aiyam allatuitu collap peṟāyeṉa
       uḷvarik kōlamōṭu uṉṉiya poruḷuraittu
       aivakaic camayamum aṟintaṉaḷ āṅkueṉ.
       camayakkaṇakkartam tiṟam kēṭṭa kātai muṟṟiṟṟu.
       --------------

                Chapter 27. Manimekalai and the philosophers
       Manimekalai took the form of a sage
       and approached the Samaya Kanakkar’s place.
       She went to the Alavaivādi who followed the Vaidika tradition
       and asked him,
       “Tell me the philosophy you follow.”
       The Alavaivādi told her
       We follow the three sages—Vedaviyasar, Kirudakoodi and faultless
       Saimini—
       and the rishis who explained ten, eight and six in their various
       philosophies.
       The ten pramānas of the Vaidika tradition are
       seeing, thinking, simile, āgama, arthāpati,
       iyalbu, aidiham, abhāvam, meetci and ozhivarivu. 27-010
       The sensory perceptions are five.
       We see colors through the eyes,
       we hear sounds through the ears,
       we smell through the nose,
       we taste with the tongue,
       we feel by touch. 27-020
       We see, hear, breathe, eat and feel through these sensory organs.
       We need to know the happiness and sorrows that these give.
       One should be faultless in mind
       and experience the feelings that these senses give.
       One should know things through the light of the sun, the moon, and
       fire.
       One should not confuse one for the other and doubt their validity.
       One should know his place, name, kind, quality
       and work and the excellence of these things.
       Karuthu Alavai
       One knows what something is purely through the mind
       using inference and what is inferred.
       These are three—podu, eccam, and cause. 27-030
       1. Podu: One assumes what a thing is even though
       there is nothing to see.
       ex. A person hearing the sound of an elephant from a forest
       knows that there is a beautiful elephant in the forest.
       2. Eccham. If one sees a flood on a river, he knows
       that there must have been rain somewhere on the river.
       3. Mudal: When one does not see something
       but sees something connected to it, he assumes it is true.
       ex. If one sees dark clouds, he knows that there will be rain.
       27-040
       Simile alavai is comparing one thing to an other. 27-040
       One describes a kāyama to someone who has not seen it,
       and tells him ‘a kayama is like a cow.’
       Āgama alavai is to know from the books of wise men
       and accept that there is a happy world.
       Aruthāpatti alavai is if someone says
       there is cowherd village on [literally “in”] the Ganges
       one thinks that there is a cowherd village
       on the banks of the Ganges.
       Iyalbu alavai is when one asks a mahout for a goad for a elephant
       and the mahout gives the correct thing to him.
       Aidiga alavai is something the world considers to be true.
       If all the people of the world say that there is a pey in this
       tree.
       one believes that there is really pey in that tree. 27-050
       Abhāva alavai: when someone asks “it is in that place,”
       it is not certain the thing is in that place.
       Meetchi alavai is if one says, “Rama won the war,”
       one understands that Ravana lost the war.
       Sambava alavai is like knowing a magnet attracts iron.
       The fallacies of Alavai are eight. 27-056
       1. Suttunarvu is just to point out a thing
       and not do or say anything more about it.
       2. Thiruyakkodal is to think something is different than what it
       seems,
       eg. When one sees a shining shell he thinks it is silver. 27-060
       3. Aiyam is when one does not know what something is and is
       confused.
       eg. one sees something and does not know if it is a stick or a man.
       4. Therādu thelidal is when someone sees a stick and thinks it is a
       man.
       5. Kandu unarāmai is like seeing a cruel tiger approaching, and
       being ignorant, not understanding that it is dangerous. 27-070
       6. Il vazakku is when someone says, “a rabbit has horns,” one does
       not question that statement.
       7. Unarndathai unardal is like thinking that being near fire is
       helpful when the weather is cold.
       8. Ninaippu is like believing someone who says,
       “these are your parents” without determining
       whether they are really your parents.
       The alavais in this ninaippu are
       logāyadam, bhauta, sāṅkhya, naiyāyigam,
       vaiśeṣika and mīmaṃsaka. 27-080
       The authors of these are Brugarpathi, Sivan, Kapilan,
       Akkabādan and Kanādan, and their philosophies are
       jaimini, meyppirattiyam, anumānam, sātham, uvamānam, arthāpatti,
       and abhāvam.
       These are the alavai available now.
       The four that are not used in the traditions are
       iyalbu, aideeham, meetchi and ullaneri.
       Saivavādi.
       After listening to the Alavaivādi, ManimekaLai saw a Saivavādi.
       27-090
       The Saivavādi thinks that God is Shiva.
       She asked him, “What kind of God is the one that you worship?”
       Saivavādi
       “Shiva has these characters.
       His body is made of the following eight things—
       the sun, moon, the soul, earth, water, fire, wind and sky.
       He has the wisdom of many arts.
       He creates everything and makes them function in the world.
       He destroys the things he created
       and removes the sorrow of birth of all creatures.
       There are no other gods equal to or better than he.”
       Brahmavādi
       The Brahmavādi said,
       “All these large worlds are an egg that Brahma has created.”
       Vaishnavavādi
       The Vaishnavavādi, the devotee of
       the ocean-colored Vishnu who recites Vishnu’s purānas
       said, “Narayanan is the protector of the world.” 27-100
       Vedavādi
       The Vedavādi told Manimekalai,
       “The Veda Purushan’s hands are the six parts of the Veda (karpam)
       the chandas (meters) are his legs.
       numbers are his eyes, nirutham are his ears,
       chikkai is his nose,
       and grammar is his face.
       The lord of the Vedas
       does not have any birth or depend on anything.
       He does not have beginning or end.
       We follow what the Vedas tell us.”
       Ājeevakavādi
       Manimekalai did not agree with any of the philosophies that she
       heard,
       and she approached the Ājeevakavādi and asked him,
       “Who is the god that you worship?
       What is the philosophy of your religious books?” 27-110
       He said, “Our god has limitless knowledge
       and he spreads everywhere in the world always
       and he never leaves things.
       Anu, their qualities and life
       Our books describe five anu’s:
       life and four other anu’s—earth, water, fire and wind.
       An anu can see, feel, touch and hear.
       Fire, water, wind and earth can form as a mountain, tree or body.
       They can join together or be separated.
       It is the uyir that knows
       how the anu’s join together and separate. 27-120
       The qualities of anu’s
       The earth anu is strong and does not move.
       The water anu is rain that falls from the sky.
       It is cold and falls on the earth with the sound ‘izhin’
       then it goes into the deep earth.
       The fire anu burns goes only upwards.
       The wind anu moves over all places. 27-125
       The highest anu’s. Parama anukkal.
       The parama anu’s are four .
       They have no origin and do not combine with anything.
       They have no evil and will not destroy anything.
       No anu is born new
       and no anu can enter into another anu. 27-130
       The oldest water anu does not change to an earth anu.
       It does not split into two.
       Anu’s do not spread like small pieces.
       They can wander, fall on the earth or rise above it.
       The mountains that are made of the earth anu
       can break into pieces, become sand
       and also join together again.
       They can become hard.
       They can separate and become just like their original form.
       The anu’s that are trees become very strong.
       The trees can be like bamboos that are hollow.
       They can produce seed and grow again.
       They can form a beautiful circle on the earth like the full moon.
       27-137
       These anu’s become the elements and do not become more or less.
       They are split into, one, three-fourths, half, and quarter of their
       sizes. 27-140
       The earth anu is one, the water anu is three-fourths,
       the fire anu is half and wind anu is a quarter.
       When these anu’s are elements [sky, wind, water, fire or earth]
       they do not become more or less.
       Each anu has its own quality:t
       the earth anu is thick;
       the water anu falls from the sky;
       the fire anu burns like fire;
       and the wind anu blows. 27-145
       No anu takes any other quality.
       Sages know each anu separately
       but others do not know the anu’s once they become an element.
       Seeing a sunset is like all seeing hair in a bunch—
       one cannot see separate hairs. 27-150
       People wish to be born on the earth,
       and have six kinds of births—
       black, dark blue, green, red, gold and white.
       Finally they reach moksha after their white birth.
       Only people who do not want to be born again
       and are born in their white birth reach moksha. 27-155
       This path is called chembokku.
       If something wrong happens on this path,
       it is called the mandala path.
       When a soul is an embryo:
       it may have a good life,
       it may experience trouble,
       it may reach good places,
       it may experience sorrow and joy.
       In its life it may have things or not have things,
       and it will be born again and die again. 27-160
       Joy and sorrow are also anu’s.
       A soul experiences the results
       of the karma of its previous births in its next births.
       This is the teaching of the book called Markali
       which was written by Markalikosalar.”
       Nikandavādi.
       Manimekalai left him and went to the Nikandavādi
       and asked him, “Tell me, who is the god you praise.
       What are the philosophies of the books that you follow?
       Tell me the meaning of the nikazvu, kattu and veedu.
       Tell me truly.” 27-170
       He said, “Our god is worshiped by Indra. 27-171
       The philosophy our god gave
       and preached in our books includes
       tanmāthikāyam, adanmāttikāyam,
       kālākāyam, the faultless soul, the highest anu’s,
       the faultless jeevan, good karma, bad karma,
       the results they give, and moksha.
       Ākkal, appearance
       All things in the world, have their own nature,
       or they have the nature of something related to them,
       including impermanence and permanence,
       and they appear, stay and are destroyed. 27-180
       Nithiyam and anithiyam—permanence and impermanence.
       A margosa seed grows into a margosa plant and remains always as
       margosa.
       If this plant changes its nature, it is impermanent. If the nature
       of the seed changes and becomes soft
       the nature of old seed is destroyed and it grows into a a plant.
       Darmāthikāyam.
       Things exist everywhere and conduct all their actions according to
       their karma.
       Adanmāttikāyam
       These things have the same nature
       and conduct the actions of lives according to their karma. 27-190
       Kālam—time
       Time may have a momentary nature or last a long time.
       Āhāyam, ether or space.
       The nature of space is to be expanded and give room for all the
       things that appear.
       Jeevan, life
       Life in a body experiences all actions—tasting, breathing, seeing,
       hearing and feeling.
       Veedu, moksha
       Moksha is called the purkalam, the highest anu.
       The soul changes the joy and sorrow that good and bad karma give,
       experiences the results of karma, destroys birth and reaches
       moksha. 27-200
       Sānkhya
       In sānkhya there are three qualities.
       Their origin is not from the mind,
       butthey only happen from perception.
       This is mulam, the root.
       The things created from the mulam are:
       from thinking (cittam) buddhi appears,
       from buddhi sky (ākāyam) appears,
       from sky wind appears,
       from wind fire appears,
       from fire water appears,
       and from water earth appears.
       When these are joined together mind appears.
       The vikāras
       From a disturbed mind egoism appears.
       From sky, sound for the ears appears.
       From wind body sensation appears.
       From fire light for the eyes appears.
       From water taste for the mouth appears.
       From earth smell for the nose appears.
       From the body come speech, pādam, pāni, vāyu, and voiding.
       From the evolution (vikāra) of the elements,
       trees and mountains appear and become the world.
       They go back to where they came from
       and are destroyed at the time of pralaya.
       Until then they are in the world permanently. 27-225.
       The principle of purusha.
       The purusha is easy to understand.
       He/it does not have the three qualities.
       It has no single quality that can be perceived by the senses.
       Nothing can come out of it,
       but it is able to understand all things. 27-230
       It is unique,
       it spreads everywhere,
       it is permanent,
       it fills everything
       It is a feeling in the mind
       and that is the nature of purusha.
       The things that purush knows are twenty-five:
       earth, water, fire, wind, sky,
       body, mouth, eyes, nose, ears,
       taste, light, feeling, sound, smell,
       speech, hands, legs, the anu’s, ubatham,
       mind, knowledge, egoism, thinking, and self (ātma).” 27-240
       Manimekalai went to the Vaiseshikan and asked him to tell his
       philosophy.
       He said, “The vaiseshika principles are six:
       faultless things, qualities, actions, common things,
       unique (cirappu) things and combined things.
       Faultless things have qualities and actions. 27-245.
       Porul is the origin of all things. Porul has nine parts:
       earth, water, fire, wind, sky, directions, time, ātma and mind.
       Among these earth has five qualities: sound, touch, color, taste
       and smell.
       The other four elements (except earth)
       each has one quality less than the preceding element.
       Gunam
       The qualities of gunam are
       sound, touch, color, smell, taste. faultlessness, greatness,
       smalljess,
       strength, softness, fineness, thinness, form,
       left and right sides, wealth, poverty, front and back. 27-255.
       Podu, sāmāniyam, vishesham and kuttam
       Porul and gunam act.
       The mudal podu shows truth.
       Since all things have the common quality of going away and
       remaining,
       dying and living are qualities of porul. 27-260
       This is also called sāmāniyam.
       Visesham is one anu. It is the unique quality of a porul.
       Time, place, sky, ātma and mind all belong to visesham.
       Samavāyam (kuuttam) is guna (quality) and guni (someone/thing that
       has a quality).”
       The Bhutavadi (or ulagavādi)
       Manimekalai went to the bhutavadi and asked him to describe his
       philosophy. 27-265.
       The bhutavādi said,
       “If someone mixes an athi flower and sugar together, he will get
       liquor.
       Similarly, when elements combine they produce a sensation.
       When the sensation disappears, the elements become separate.
       When one beats a drum, music appears,
       when he stops, the sound will become less and less and stop.
       Just like that the elements will separate and go back to their
       origin.
       There are elements that join with life to give feelings,
       and there are parts of element that are added to give feelings.
       There are some elements without llfe that do not have feelings
       and their parts do not have feelings.
       This is the true way. 27-270
       In bhūtavādam each element is born with its own quality
       and this is its true philosophy.
       If someone says something different than this,
       his philosophy is called ulogāyudam.
       According to ulogāyudam things are born and die in this world
       and results of actions are experienced only in this birth.
       There is no next birth.” 27-275.
       Manimekalai laughs and opposes the bhudavādi
       Manimekalai said, “I have heard various philosophies of many
       religions.
       Whether they are good or bad, I will not say anything against
       them.”
       Since she knew the events that occurred in her previous birth, she
       laughed. 27-280
       The ulogavādi said, “There is no difference between thinking there
       are gods
       and seeing things in a dream. Both are only a play of the mind.”
       Manimekalai said, 27-285
       “If someone say these people are your parents,
       how do you know they are really your parents?
       It is hard to know if something is true,
       unless you have the feeling it is true.
       You say this is doubtful but you don’t explain why.”
       In a form of a sage, Manimekalai learned these five philosophies.
       27-289
       -----------
                           __________________________

                       28. kacci mānakar pukka kātai
[ maṇimēkalai tāyarōṭu aṟavaṇar aṭikaḷaiyum tērntu kaccimānakarkkaṇceṉṟa
                                pāṭṭu ]

       āṅkut tāyarōṭu aṟavaṇart tērntu
       vāṅkuvil taṉai vāṉavaṉ vañciyiṉ
       vēṟṟu maṉṉarum uḻiñaivem paṭaiyum
       pōlpuṟam cuṟṟiya puṟakkuṭi kaṭantu,
       curuṅkait tūmpiṉ maṉaivaḷar tōkaiyar
       karuṅkuḻal kaḻīiya kalavai nīrum
       entira vāviyil iḷaiñarum makaḷirum
       tantamil āṭiya cāntukaḻi nīrum
       puvikā valaṉtaṉ puṇṇiya nalnāḷ
       civiṟiyum kompum citaṟuvirai nīrum         28-10
       mēlai mātavar pātam viḷakkum
       cīla upācakar ceṅkainaṟu nīrum
       aṟamcey mākkaḷ akilmutal pukaittu
       niṟainta pantal tacumpuvār nīrum
       uṟuppumuraṇ uṟumal kantaut tiyiṉāl
       ceṟittuaraip pōrtam ceḻumaṉai nīrum
       eṉṟuin nīrē eṅkum pāytalil
       kaṉṟiya karāmum iṭaṅkarum mīṉkaḷum
       oṉṟiya pulavuoḻi uṭampiṉa ākit
       tāmarai kuvaḷai kaḻunīr āmpal         28-20
       pūmicai parantu poṟivaṇṭu ārppa
       intira taṉueṉa ilaṅkuakaḻ uṭuttu,
       vantueṟi poṟikaḷ vakaimāṇpu uṭaiya
       kaṭimatil ōṅkiya iṭainilai varaippil
       pacumiḷai parantu paltoḻil niṟainta
       veḷḷik kuṉṟam uḷkiḻin taṉṉa
       neṭunilai tōṟum nilāccutai malarum
       koṭinilai vāyil kuṟukiṉaḷ pukku,
       kaṭaikāppu amainta kāva lāḷar
       miṭaikoṇṭu iyaṅkum viyaṉmali maṟukum,         28-30
       palmīṉ vilaiñar veḷuppup pakarunar
       kaḷnoṭai yāṭṭiyar kāḻiyar kūviyar
       mainniṇa vilaiñar pācavar vācavar
       eṉṉunar maṟukum iruṅkō vēṭkaḷum
       cempu ceyññarum kañca kārarum
       paimpoṉ ceyññarum poṉcey kollarum
       maraṅkol taccarum maṇṇīṭ ṭāḷarum
       varamtara eḻutiya ōviya mākkaḷum
       tōliṉ tuṉṉarum tuṉṉa viṉaiñarum
       mālaik kārarum kālak kaṇitarum         28-40
       nalamtarum paṇṇum tiṟaṉum vāyppa
       nilamkalam kaṇṭam nikaḻak kāṭṭum
       pāṇar eṉṟuivar palvakai maṟukum
       vilaṅkuaram porūum veḷvaḷai pōḻnarōṭu
       ilaṅkumaṇi viṉaiñar irīiya maṟukum
       vēttiyal potuviyal eṉṟuiv viraṇṭiṉ
       kūttiyal aṟinta kūttiyar maṟukum
       pālvē ṟāka eṇvakaip paṭṭa
       kūlam kuvaiiya kūla maṟukum
       mākatar cūtarvē tāḷikar maṟukum         28-50
       pōkam purakkum potuvarpoli maṟukum
       kaṇnuḻai kallā nuṇnūl kaiviṉai
       vaṇṇa aṟuvaiyar vaḷamtikaḻ maṟukum
       poṉurai kāṇpōr nalmaṉai maṟukum
       palmaṇi pakarvōr maṉṉiya maṟukum
       maṟaiyōr aruntoḻil kuṟaiyā maṟukum
       araiciyaṉ maṟukum amaicciyaṉ maṟukum
       eṉaipperun toḻilcey ēṉōr maṟukum
       maṉṟamum potiyilum cantiyum catukkamum
       putukkōḷ yāṉaiyum poṉtārp puraviyum         28-60
       katikkuuṟa vaṭippōr kaviṉpeṟu vītiyum
       cēṇōṅku aruvi tāḻntacey kuṉṟamum
       vēṇavā mikukkum viraimarak kāvum
       viṇṇavar taṅkaḷ vicumpuiṭam maṟantu
       naṇṇutaṟku otta nalnīr iṭaṅkaḷum
       cālaiyum kūṭamum tamaṉiyap potiyilum
       kōlam kuyiṉṟa koḷkai iṭaṅkaḷum
       kaṇṭumakiḻvu uṟṟuk koṇṭa vēṭamōṭu,
       antara cārikaḷ amarntuiṉitu uṟaiyum
       intira vikāram eṉaeḻil peṟṟu         28-70
       navaiaṟu nātaṉ nalaṟam pakarvōr
       uṟaiyum paḷḷipukku iṟaivaḷai nallāḷ
       kōvalaṉ tātai mātavam purintōṉ
       pātam paṇintutaṉ pāttira tāṉamum
       tāṉap payattāl cāvaka maṉṉavaṉ
       ūṉamoṉṟu iṉṟi ulakuāḷ celvamum
       celvaṉ koṇarntuat tīvakap pīṭikai
       olkātu kāṭṭap piṟappiṉai uṇarntatum
       uṇarntōṉ muṉṉar uyarteyvam tōṉṟi
       maṉamkaval keṭuttatum mānakar kaṭalkoḷa         28-80
       aṟavaṇa raṭikaḷum tāyarum āṅkuviṭṭu
       iṟavātu ippatip pukuntatu kēṭṭatum
       cāvaka maṉṉaṉ taṉnāṭu eytat
       tīvakam viṭṭuit tirunakar pukuntatum
       pukkapiṉ antap poyuru vuṭaṉē
       takka camayikaḷ tamtiṟam kēṭṭatum
       avvavar camayattu aṟiporuḷ ellām
       cevvitu aṉmaiyiṟ cintaivai yātatum
       nātaṉ nalaṟam kēṭṭalai virumpi
       mātavaṉ tērntu vanta vaṇṇamum         28- 90
       colliṉaḷ ātaliṉ, tūyōy niṉṉaieṉ
       nalviṉaip payaṉkol nāṉkaṇ ṭatueṉat
       taiyal kēḷniṉ tātaiyum tāyum
       ceytatī viṉaiyil ceḻunakar kēṭuuṟat
       tuṉpuuṟa viḷintamai kēṭṭuc cukataṉ
       aṉpukoḷ aṟattiṟku arukaṉēṉ ātaliṉ
       maṉaittiṟa vāḻkkaiyai māyameṉṟu uṇarntu
       tiṉaittaṉai āyiṉum celvamum yākkaiyum
       nilaiyā eṉṟē nilaipeṟa uṇarntē
       malaiyā aṟattiṉ mātavam purintēṉ         28-100
       purinta yāṉip pūṅkoṭip peyarppaṭūum
       tiruntiya nalnakarc cērntatu kēḷāy:
       kuṭakkōc cēralaṉ kuṭṭuvar peruntakai
       viṭarccilai poṟitta vēntaṉ muṉnāḷ
       tuppuaṭu cevvāyt tuṭiiṭai yāroṭum
       ippoḻil pukuntuāṅku irunta ellaiyuḷ
       ilaṅkā tīvattuc camaṉoḷi eṉṉum
       cilampiṉai eyti valamkoṇṭu mīḷum
       taruma cāraṇar taṅkiya kuṇattōr
       karumukil paṭalattuk kakaṉattu iyaṅkuvōr         28-110
       araicaṟku ētu avvaḻi nikaḻtaliṉ
       puraiyōr tāmumip pūmpoḻil iḻintu
       kaltalattu iruntuḻik kāvalaṉ virumpi
       muṉtavam uṭaimaiyiṉ muṉikaḷai ēttip
       paṅkayac cēvaṭi viḷakkip pāṉmaiyiṉ
       aṅkuavarkku aṟucuvai nālvakai amiḻtam
       pāttirattu aḷittup palapala ciṟappoṭu
       vēttavai yāroṭum ēttiṉaṉ iṟaiñcalil
       piṟappil tuṉpamum piṟavā iṉpamum
       aṟattakai mutalvaṉ aruḷiya vāymai         28-120
       iṉpa āramutu iṟaivaṉ cevimutal
       tuṉpam nīṅkac coriyum annāḷ,
       niṉperun tātaikku oṉpatu vaḻimuṟai
       muṉṉōṉ kōvalaṉ maṉṉavaṉ taṉakku
       nīṅkāk kātal pāṅkaṉ ātaliṉ
       taṅkā nalaṟam tāṉum kēṭṭu
       muṉṉōr muṟaimaiyiṉ paṭaittatai aṉṟit
       taṉṉāṉ iyaṉṟa taṉampala kōṭi
       eḻunāḷ ellaiyuḷ iravalarkku īttut
       toḻutavam purintōṉ cukataṟku iyaṟṟiya         28-130
       vāṉōṅku cimaiyattu vāloḷic cayittam
       īṉōrkku ellām iṭarkeṭa iyaṉṟatu
       kaṇṭutoḻutu ēttum kātaliṉ vantuit
       taṇṭāk kāṭcit tavattōr aruḷik
       kāvirip paṭṭiṉam kaṭalkoḷum eṉṟaat
       tūurai kēṭṭut tuṇintuivaṇ iruntatu
       iṉṉum kēḷāy nalneṟi mātē!
       tīviṉai uruppac ceṉṟaniṉ tātaiyum
       tēvaril tōṉṟimuṉ ceytavap payattāl
       āṅkuat tīviṉai iṉṉum tuyttup         28-140
       pūṅkoṭi muṉṉavaṉ pōtiyil nalaṟam
       tāṅkiya tavattāl tāṉtavam tāṅkik
       kātali taṉṉoṭu kapilaiyam patiyil
       nātaṉ nalaṟam kēṭṭuvīṭu eytumeṉṟu
       aṟputak kiḷavi aṟintōr kūṟac
       colpayaṉ uṇarntēṉ tōkai yāṉum
       annāḷ āṅkuavaṉ aṟaneṟi kēṭkuvaṉ
       niṉṉatu taṉmaian neṭunilaik kantiltuṉṉiya
       tuvatikaṉ uraiyil tuṇintaṉai aṉṟō
       tavaneṟi aṟavaṇaṉ cāṟṟak kēṭṭaṉaṉ         28-150
       āṅkuavaṉ tāṉumniṉ aṟattiṟku ētup
       pūṅkoṭi kacci mānakar ātaliṉ
       maṟṟuam mānakar mātavaṉ peyarnāḷ
       poṉtoṭi tāyarum appatip paṭarntaṉar
       aṉṉatai aṉṟiyum aṇiyiḻai kēḷāy:
       poṉeyil kāñci nāṭukaviṉ aḻintu
       maṉuyir maṭiya maḻaivaḷam karattaliṉ
       annakar mātavarkku aiyam iṭuvōr
       iṉmaiyiṉ innakar eytiṉar kāṇāy
       āruyir maruntē! annāṭṭu akavayiṉ         28-160
       kāreṉat tōṉṟik kāttalniṉ kaṭaṉeṉa
       aruntavaṉ aruḷa, āyiḻai vaṇaṅkit
       tiruntiya pāttiram ceṅkaiyiṉ ēntik
       koṭimatil mūtūrk kuṭakkaṇniṉṟu ōṅki
       vaṭaticai maruṅkiṉ vāṉattu iyaṅki,
       tēvar kōmāṉ kāval mānakar
       maṇmicaik kiṭanteṉa vaḷamtalai mayaṅkiya
       poṉnakar vaṟitāp puleṉṟu āyatu
       kaṇṭuuḷam kacinta oṇtoṭi naṅkai
       poṉkoṭi mūtūrp puricai valamkoṇṭu         28-170
       naṭunakar ellai naṇṇiṉaḷ iḻintu
       toṭukaḻal kiḷḷi tuṇaiiḷaṅ kiḷḷi
       cempoṉ mācciṉait tirumaṇip pācaṭaip
       paimpūm pōtip pakavaṟku iyaṟṟiya
       cētiyam toḻutu, teṉmēṟkākat
       tātuaṇi pūmpoḻil tāṉceṉṟu eytalum,
       vaiyam kāvalaṉ taṉpāl ceṉṟu
       kaitoḻutu iṟaiñcik kañcukaṉ uraippōṉ
       kōvalaṉ maṭantai kuṇavatam purintōḷ
       nāvalam tīvil tāṉnaṉi mikkōḷ         28-180
       aṅkaiyiṉ ēntiya amuta curapiyoṭu
       taṅkātu ippatit tarumata vaṉattē
       vantu tōṉṟiṉaḷ māmaḻai pōleṉa,
       mantirac cuṟṟamoṭu maṉṉaṉum virumpik
       kantiṟ pāvai kaṭṭurai ellām
       vāyā kiṉṟaṉa vantittu ētti
       āyvaḷai nallāḷ taṉṉuḻaic ceṉṟu,
       ceṅkōl kōṭiyō ceytavam piḻaittō
       koṅkuaviḻ kuḻalār kaṟpuk kuṟaipaṭṭō
       nalattakai nallāy nalnāṭu ellām         28-190
       alattal kālai ākiyatu aṟiyēṉ
       mayaṅkuvēṉ muṉṉarōr māteyvam tōṉṟi
       uyaṅkātu oḻiniṉ uyartavat tālōr
       kārikai tōṉṟum avaḷperuṅ kaṭiñaiyiṉ
       āruyir maruntāl akalnilam uyyum
       āṅkuavaḷ aruḷāl amararkōṉ ēvalil
       tāṅkā māriyum tāṉnaṉi poḻiyum
       annāḷ inta akanakar pukunta
       piṉnāḷ nikaḻum pēraṟam palavāl
       kārvaṟam kūriṉum nīrvaṟam kūrātu         28-200
       pāraka vitiyil paṇṭaiyōr iḻaitta
       kōmuki eṉṉum koḻunīr ilañciyoṭu
       māmaṇi pallavam vantatu īṅkueṉap
       poykaiyum poḻilum puṉaimiṉeṉṟu aṟaintatuat
       teyvatam pōyapiṉ ceytuyām amaittatu
       ivviṭam eṉṟē avviṭam kāṭṭa, at
       tīvakam pōṉṟa kāakam poruntik
       kaṇṭuuḷam ciṟanta kārikai nallāḷ
       paṇṭaiem piṟappiṉaip pāṉmaiyil kāṭṭiya
       aṅkuap pīṭikai itueṉa aṟavōṉ         28-210
       paṅkayap pīṭikai pāṉmaiyiṉ vakuttut
       tīva tilakaiyum tirumaṇi mēkalā
       māperun teyvamum vantittu ēttutaṟku
       otta kōyiluḷ attakap puṉaintu
       viḻavum ciṟappum vēntaṉ iyaṟṟa
       toḻutakai mātar toḻutaṉaḷ ētti,
       paṅkayap pīṭikai pacippiṇi maruntueṉum
       aṅkaiyiṉ ēntiya amuta curapiyai
       vaittuniṉṟu ellā uyirum varukeṉap
       paittaravu alkul pāvaitaṉ kiḷaviyiṉ         28-220
       moytta mūvaṟu pāṭai mākkaḷil
       kāṇār kēḷār kālmuṭam āṉōr
       pēṇā mākkaḷ pēcār piṇittōr
       paṭiva nōṉpiyar pacinōy uṟṟōr
       maṭinal kūrnta mākkaḷ yāvarum
       palnūṟu āyiram vilaṅkiṉ tokutiyum
       maṉuyir aṭaṅkalum vantuoruṅku īṇṭi
       aruntiyōrkku ellām āruyir maruntāyp
       peruntavar kaipey piccaiyiṉ payaṉum
       nīrum nilamum kālamum karuviyum         28-230
       cīrpeṟa vittiya vittiṉ viḷaivum
       perukiyatu eṉṉap peruvaḷam curappa
       vacittoḻil utavi vaḷamtan tatueṉap
       pacippiṇi tīrtta pāvaiyai ēttic
       celluṅ kālai, -tāyar tammuṭaṉ
       allavai kaṭinta aṟavaṇa vaṭikaḷum
       mallal mūtūr maṉuyir mutalvi
       nalaṟac cālai naṇṇiṉar cēṟalum
       ceṉṟuavar tammait tiruvaṭi vaṇaṅki
       naṉṟueṉa virumpi nalaṭi kaḻuvi         28-240
       ācaṉattu ēṟṟi aṟucuvai nālvakaip
       pōṉakam ēntip poḻutiṉil koṇṭapiṉ
       pācilait tiraiyalum paḷitamum paṭaittu
       vāyva tākaeṉ maṉappāṭṭu aṟameṉa
       māyaiviṭṭu iṟaiñciṉaḷ maṇimē kalaieṉ.
       kacci mānakar pukka kātai muṟṟiṟṟu.
       -----------

      Chapter 28. Manimekalai goes to Kanji. The Story of Māsāthuvan
       Manimekalai went with her mothers Mādhavi
       and Sudhamathi to see Aravanar.
       They went to Vanji
       the city of the Chera king, chief of an army of archers.
       They crossed the outer lands
       of other kings with their strong army
       and villages surrounded with uzhinai plants. .
       Water flowing in the moats and ponds of Vanji
       Women on the porches of the palaces
       washed their black hair in fragrant water
       that came to them in pipes.
       Young men and women bathed in water perfumed with sandal paste
       in the artificial pond and where water flowed.
       People sprinkled fragrant water
       with their fans and kombu on the king’s auspicious day. 28-010
       With flowing water,
       women ornamented with mekalai anklets
       washed the feet of sages who expounded on their philosophies.
       People who wished to feed the poor
       kindled fire that produced smoke so they could cook.
       Water flowed pandal where they give food to the poor.
       The water flowed from homes
       where people ground fragrant powders that flowed with the water.
       Alligators and crocodiles, weak and thin, floated in the moat.
       Lotus, ambal, kazuneer and kuvalai flowers bloomed everywhere.
       Dotted bees swarmed about, drinking and buzzing in the moat.
       The city was surrounded with moats and many-colored walls
       that were like a rainbow, the bow of Indra, the king of the gods.
       28-020
       On the porches of the houses, the bright light of the moon shone
       and it looked like a silver mountain splitting in half.
       Manimekalai entered the bannered gate of the city. 28-028
       Manimekalai walks through the streets. The streets and places of
       Vanji
       There were many streets where guards wandered,
       and many streets where the following merchants sell things—
       some sold fish, some sold white salt, some sold toddy.
       some sold meat and some sold pan.
       There were streets where potters lived
       who made clay pots, copper pots and brass pots.
       There were streets of gold smiths who made jewelry,
       carpenters, sculptors, painters, cobblers,
       tailors, garland makers, astrologers,
       bards and singers of music with instruments.
       There were streets for those who made things with shells and
       conches,
       makers of pearl garland
       and dancers for the king’s assembly and other people.
       There were streets grain of different kinds was sold.
       On various streets, different people lived—
       royalty, those who announce the time by ringing bells,
       dasis who provided enjoyment to men,
       weavers with colorful clothes,
       vannakkars checking the value of the gold,
       merchants who sold precious diamonds,
       Brahmins who performed sacrifices three times a day,
       ministers of the king and royal. 28-060
       The city was filled with mandrams, gardens,
       small lanes and crossroads,
       streets where mahouts trained new elephants,
       trainers of horses decorated with golden garlands,
       hillocks with beautiful waterfalls,
       fragrant hills that made all feel desire,
       flourishing ponds where gods came to stay
       forgetting their beautiful world in the sky,
       places where the poor were fed,
       treasuries, temples of gold,
       and places with beautiful paintings.
       Manimekalai ornamented with beautiful bracelets,
       entered the temple there where sages do good dharma
       in the beautiful Indra vikāram. 28-070
       Manimekalai tells her story to Māsāthuvān, her grandfather
       .
       She worshiped the feet of Kovalan’s father,
       Māsāthuvān, the sage of good tapas and told him the events of her
       life—
       she had brought king Punniyarājan
       to the Buddha Peedihai in Manipallavam,
       the Buddha Peedihai had told the king his previous birth,
       the goddess Deepathilahai had come to him 28-080
       and removed the confusion in his mind,
       Manimekalai’s mothers Mādhavi and Sudhamati
       had come to Vanji with Aravanar 28-080
       when the famous Pukār was swallowed by the ocean,
       the king of Jāvaka country Punniyarājan
       had returned to his country from Manipallavam,
       Manimekalai, disguised as a male sage,
       had listened to philosophies of religious scholars,
       she had ignored some of the words of the religious sages
       because she did not agree with them
       and she had searched for Aravanar Adigal
       to learn the dharma of god Buddha.
       She told all these events to her grandfather Māsāthuvān. 28-090
       Māsāthuvān speaks to Manimekalai,
       Māsāthuvān said, “O pure one, it is my good karma
       that has allowed me to see you. Listen.
       When I heard that your father and mother were in Madurai
       and it was destroyed and they died,
       I felt very sad and became a devotee of the Buddha.
       I understood that family life is an illusion.
       The small amount of wealth and small body one has are unstable.
       I began to do tapas and follow the dharma
       that cannot be destroyed. 28-100
       I want to tell you how I reached Vanji city.
       At that time there was a king named Kudakko Ceeralādan
       who had imprinted emblem of the Cheras on the Himalayas.
       One day when he was in a grove with some girls
       with beautiful red lips and small drum-like waists,
       some gods from the sky came to the beautiful grove.
       At that time some dharmic Sāranar sages were returning from Sri
       Lanka
       after they had gone to Samanoli mountain there to worship it.
       They came and stayed in the grove,
       and it was a time of good fortune for the king.
       The king bowed to them,
       washed their lotus feet with pure water,
       gave them good food in good pots and praised them. 28-120
       They told them the sorrows of birth,
       the good fortune of not being reborn,
       and the true happiness of life.
       The king was happy to hear their words.
       They said, ‘Your ancestor Kovalan, a dear friend of the king,
       28-125
       obeyed the advice of the Sāranars
       and gave away crores of wealth to the poor
       in seven days and did tapas.
       We came here to worship the shining Chaitya temple
       after we heard that Kāviripumpattinam
       would be swallowed by the ocean
       and decided to stay here.’” 28-135.
       Māsāthuvān continued,
       “I heard what the Sāranars said to the king
       and I am also waiting like them.
       Listen. You, beautiful as a flowering vine, will follow good paths
       of life.
       Your father and mother will experience the results of their karma,
       and then they will hear the dharma of the Buddha
       and do tapas under a peepal tree.
       In Kabilai city, they will listen to the good dharma of sages
       and reach moksha.
       O beautiful as a peacock,
       I will also listen to their words of dharma.28-145
       Thiruvadigan, the Kanthil Pāvai told your future to you,
       and Aravanar also told me all that Thuvathihan had told you.
       Aravanar, knowing that you will be in Kanchi, went and stayed
       there.
       Your mothers Mādhavi and Sudhamati
       also went with him and stayed there. 28-155
       “O you ornamented with jewels,
       there is no rain in the country of Kanchi
       surrounded with golden forts
       and its people are starving.
       There is no one there
       to feed the sages and people.
       You have the Amudhasurabhi pot
       the remedy that save people’s lives, in your hands.
       It is your duty to go there like rain and protect them.” 28-160
       The ornamented Manimekalai,
       hearing what that her grandfather said, bowed to him.
       She took the divine pot in her lovely hands
       and went to ancient Kanchi city surrounded with bannered walls.
       She saw that the golden Kanchi city
       which had been flourishing before like Amarāvathi,
       the guarded city of Indra the king of gods,
       was now suffering from famine.
       Manimekalai, wearing shining bracelets,
       went around the forts of the city
       and reached the center of the city. 28-170
       She saw a temple built by Ilangilli
       the younger brother of the ankleted Killi
       where there was Bodhi tree with flourishing green leaves
       that was like a green emerald.
       She went to the southwest into a flourishing grove
       whose flowers dripped with honey. 28-175
       At that time, a guard came to the king Ilangilli,
       bowed to him and said,
       “Manimekalai, the daughter of Kōvalan
       has performed great tapas.
       There is no one equal to her in this world.
       She has come to this city and is staying in the Dharma Vanam,
       as auspicious as a strong rain.
       She carries in her beautiful hands
       the Amudhasurabhi pot that can take away the hunger of all.”
       The king understood that all the things
       that the Kanthil Pāvai had said are true. 28-0185.
       He praised the Kanthil Pāvai and went to see Manimekalai
       with his ministers.
       The king said to Manimekalai,
       “I was worried and did not know
       why famine is destroying this city.
       Is it because I did not rule the country with justice?
       Or I have not done good tapas?
       Are the women here, wearing honey-dripping flowers,
       unfaithful to their husbands?
       You are a good person.
       Why is the country like this? I do not understand. 28-190
       As I pondered the condition of the country,
       a great goddess appeared in front of me
       and said, ‘O king, because of your excellent tapas
       a woman will come here.
       She will be holding a begging pot in her hand
       that will feed everyone
       and take away the famine in this country.
       Because of her grace,
       the king of the gods Indra will order
       Varuna to pour rain and the land will flourish.
       After she comes here, many good things will happen,
       and even when there is no rain, water will be plentiful, 28-200
       making this place like Manipallavam island filled with ponds of
       plentiful water
       or like Gomuki pond that was made by our ancestors.
       There will be ponds and blooming groves in this place.’
       The goddess said this to me and went away.
       I made this place as the goddess asked me to do.”
       The king took Manimekalai to the place that he had made.
       Manimekalai was happy to see the place
       and worshiped the goddess and the Peedihai. 28-210
       He made a beautiful temple for Deepathilahai
       and the goddess Manimekalai and worshiped them.
       He also made a Peedihai in the form of a lotus and said to
       Manimekalai,
       “This is the Peedihai that told my previous births.”
       He celebrated a festival and other ceremonies
       for the goddesses and the Peedihai.
       Manimekalai took the Amudhasurabhi,
       the remedy for hunger, in her hands
       and called all the people who speak the 18 languages.
       She called the deaf, the blind, the lame,
       orphans, the dumb, the sick,
       those who did tapas, the hungry and the poor.
       She also called the animals and birds.
       All the people and the creatures crowded together
       and praised Manimekalai, saying,
       “She will take away this sickness of hunger!”
       The Amudhasurabhi gave food
       like land planted at the right time that flourishes. 28-230
       It gave food to all like rain that nourishes the earth.
       At that time, her mothers Mādhavi and Sudhamati
       came with Aravanar who only does dharma
       and reached the hall of dharma.
       Manimekalai was happy to see them, bowed and washed their feet.
       28-240
       She asked them to sit and gave them tasty food.
       After they ate, she gave them pan.
       She said, “May the dharma that is in my mind
       be without the illusions of the world and become true.” 28-245
       -------
                           __________________________

            29. tavattiṟam pūṇṭu tarumam kēṭṭa kātai
              [ maṇimēkalai, kāñcimānakarkkaṇ ceṉṟa
             piṉṉar aṟavaṇa aṭikaḷum tāyarum cella
         avaraikkaṇṭu iṟaiñcit tarumamkēṭṭa pāṭṭu ]

       iṟaiñciya iḷaṅkoṭi taṉṉai vāḻtti
       aṟamtikaḻ nāviṉ aṟavaṇaṉ uraippōṉ:
       veṉvēl kiḷḷikku nākanāṭu āḷvōṉ
       taṉmakaḷ pīli vaḷaitāṉ payanta
       puṉiṟṟuiḷaṅ kuḻaviyait tīvakam poruntita
       taṉikkalak kampaḷac ceṭṭikait taralum
       vaṇaṅkik koṇṭuavaṉ vaṅkam ēṟṟik
       koṇarntiṭum annāḷ kūriruḷ yāmattu
       aṭaikaraikku aṇittā ampi keṭutaluma
       marakkalam keṭuttōṉ maintaṉaik kāṇātu         29-10
       araicaṟku uṇarttalum avaṉayar vuṟṟu
       viraivaṉaṉ tēṭi viḻākkōḷ maṟappat
       taṉviḻāt tavirtaliṉ vāṉavar talaivaṉ
       niṉuyirt tantai neṭuṅkulattu utitta
       maṉuyir mutalvaṉ makara vēlaiyuḷ
       muṉṉiya vaṅkam muṅkik kēṭuṟap
       poṉṉiṉ ūci pacuṅkam paḷattut
       tuṉṉiyatu eṉṉat toṭukaṭal uḻantuḻi
       eḻunāḷ ellai iṭukkaṇvantu eytā
       vaḻuvāc cīlam vāymaiyil koṇṭa         29-20
       pāṉmaiyil taṉātu pāṇṭu kampaḷam
       tāṉnaṭukku uṟṟa taṉmai nōkki
       āti mutalvaṉ pōti mūlattu
       nātaṉ āvōṉ naḷinīrp parappiṉ
       evvamuṟ ṟāṉtaṉatu evvam tīreṉap
       pavvattu eṭuttup pāramitai muṟṟavum
       aṟaaracu āḷavum aṟavāḻi uruṭṭavum
       piṟavitōṟu utavum peṟṟiyaḷ eṉṟē
       cāraṇar aṟintōr kāraṇam kūṟa
       anta utavikku āṅkuavaḷ peyarait         29-30
       tantaiiṭ ṭaṉaṉniṉait taiyalniṉ tuṟaviyum
       aṉṟē kaṉaviṉ naṉavueṉa aṟainta
       eṉpavaṭku oppa avaṉiṭu cāpattu
       nakarkaṭal koḷḷaniṉ tāyarum yāṉum
       pakarumniṉ poruṭṭāl ippatip paṭarntaṉam
       eṉṟalum aṟavaṇaṉ tāḷiṇai iṟaiñcip
       poṉtikaḻ putta pīṭikai pōṟṟum
       tīva tilakaiyum ittiṟam ceppiṉaḷ
       ātaliṉ aṉṉa aṇinakar maruṅkē         29-40
       vēṟṟuuruk koṇṭu vevvēṟu uraikkum
       nūltuṟaic camaya nuṇporuḷ kēṭṭē
       avvuru eṉṉa aivakaic camayamum
       cevvitu aṉmaiyiṉ cintaiyiṉ vaittilēṉ
       aṭikaḷ meypporuḷ aruḷuka eṉṉa,
       noṭikuveṉ naṅkāy nuṇṇitiṉ kēḷnī:
       āti ciṉēntiraṉ aḷavai iraṇṭē
       ētamil pirattiyam karuttuaḷavu eṉṉac
       cuṭṭuṇar vaippirat tiyakkam eṉaccoli
       viṭṭaṉar nāma cātikuṇak kiriyaikaḷ         29-50
       maṟṟavai aṉumā ṉattumaṭai yumeṉaka
       kāriya kāraṇa cāmā ṉiyakkaruttu
       ōriṉ piḻaikkaiyum uṇṭupiḻai yātatu
       kaṉalil pukaipōl kāriyak karuttē
       ēṉai aḷavaikaḷ ellām karuttiṉil
       āṉa muṟaimaiyiṉ aṉumāṉa māmpiṟa
       pakkam ētut tiṭṭāntam upanayam
       nikamaṉam eṉṉa aintuuḷa avaṟṟil
       pakkam immalai neruppuuṭaittu eṉṟal
       pukaiuṭait tātalāl eṉalporuntu ētu         29-60
       vakaiamai aṭukkaḷai pōltiṭ ṭāntama
       upanayam malaiyum pukaiuṭaittu eṉṟal
       nikamaṉam pukaiuṭait tēneruppu uṭaittueṉal
       neruppuṭait tallātu yātoṉṟu atupukaipa
       poruttam iṉṟu puṉalpōl eṉṟal
       mēya vipakkattu mīṭci moḻiyāy
       vaitaṉ miyatiṭ ṭāntam ākum
       tūya kāriya ētuc cupāvam
       āyiṉ cattam anittam eṉṟala
       pakkam paṇṇap paṭuta lāleṉal         29-70
       pakka taṉma vacaṉam ākum
       yātoṉṟu yātoṉṟu paṇṇap paṭuvatu
       anittam kaṭampōl eṉṟal capakkat
       toṭarcci yātoṉṟu anittamal lātatu
       paṇṇap paṭātatu ākācam pōleṉala
       vipakkat toṭarcci mīṭcimoḻi eṉka
       anaṉṉu vayattil piramāṇam āvatu
       ivveḷ ḷiṭaikkaṇ kuṭamilai eṉṟal
       cevviya pakkam tōṉṟāmai yileṉal
       pakka taṉma vacaṉam ākum         29-80
       iṉmaiyiṉ kaṇṭilam muyalkōṭu eṉṟala
       anneṟic capakkam yātoṉṟu uṇṭuatu
       tōṟṟaravu aṭukkum kainnelli pōleṉal
       ēṟṟa vipakkattu uraieṉal ākum
       ivvakai ētup poruḷcā tippaṉa
       eṉṉaikā riyampukai cātittatu eṉṉiṉ
       pukaiuḷa iṭattu neruppuuṇṭu eṉṉum
       aṉṉuvayat tālum, neruppuilā iṭattup
       pukaiyillai eṉṉum vetirēkat tālum
       pukaii neruppaic cātittatu eṉṉiṉ         29-90
       nēriya pukaiyil nikaḻntuuṇ ṭāṉa
       ūrttac cāmam kauṭilac cāmam
       vāytta neruppiṉvaru kāriyam ātaliṉ
       mēlnōk kikkaṟuttu iruppapakaittu iruppa
       tāmē neruppaic cātikka vēṇṭum
       aṉṉu vayamcā tikkiṉ muṉṉum
       kaḻutai yaiyum kaṇikai yaiyum
       tammil orukā lattuōr iṭattē
       aṉṉu vayamkaṇ ṭāṉpiṟ kālattuk
       kaḻutaiyaik kaṇṭa iṭattē kaṇikaiyai         29-100
       aṉumikka vēṇṭum atukū ṭāneruppu
       ilāiṭat tuppukai ilaieṉa nērat
       tiruttaku vetirēkam cātikkum eṉṉiṉa
       nāyvāl illāk kaḻutaiyiṉ piṭariṉ
       narivālum ilaiyākak kāṇap paṭṭa
       ataṉaiyē koṇṭu piṟituōr iṭattu
       narivāli ṉālnāy vālaiaṉu mittala
       aritām ataṉāl atuvumā kātu.
       oṭṭiya upanayam nikamaṉam iraṇṭum
       tiṭṭān tatti lēceṉṟu aṭaṅkum         29-110
       pakkam ētut tiṭṭān taṅkaḷ
       okka nallavum tīyavum uḷaatila
       veḷippaṭ ṭuḷḷa taṉmi yiṉaiyum
       veḷippaṭ ṭuḷacāt tiyataṉ mattiṟam
       piṟitiṉ vēṟām vēṟupāṭ ṭiṉaiyum
       taṉkaṇ cārttiya nayamtarutal uṭaiyatu
       naṉkueṉ pakkameṉa nāṭṭuka atutāṉ
       cattam anittam nittameṉṟu oṉṟaip
       paṟṟi nāṭṭap paṭuvatu atiltaṉmi
       cattam cāttiya taṉma māvatu         29-120
       nittā nittam nikaḻumnal ētu
       mūṉṟāyt tōṉṟum oḻinta pakkattu
       ūṉṟi niṟṟalum capakkattuuṇ ṭātalum
       vipakkattu iṉṟiyē viṭutalum capakkam
       cātik kiṉporuḷ taṉṉāl pakkattu
       ōtiya potuvakai oṉṟi iruttala
       catta anittam cāttiyam āyiṉa
       otta anittam kaṭāti pōleṉala
       vipakkam viḷampil yātoṉṟu yātoṉṟu
       anittamal lātatu paṇṇap paṭātatu         29-130
       āa kācam pōleṉṟu ākum.
       paṇṇap paṭutalum ceyaliṭait tōṉṟalum
       naṇṇiya pakkam capakkat tilumāy
       vipakkattu iṉṟi anittat tiṉukku
       mikattarum ētuvāy viḷaṅkiṟṟu eṉka.
       ētamil tiṭṭān tamiru vakaiya
       cātaṉ miyamvai taṉmi yameṉac
       cātaṉ miyameṉap paṭuvatu tāṉē
       anittam kaṭāti aṉṉuvayattu eṉkai
       vaitaṉ miyatiṭ ṭāntam cāttiyam         29-140
       eytā iṭattil ētuvum iṉmai
       ittiṟam nalla cātaṉattu ottaṉa
       tīya pakkamum tīya ētuvum
       tīya eṭuttuk kāṭṭum āvaṉa
       pakkap pōliyum ētup pōliyuma
       tiṭṭāntap pōliyum āam ivaṟṟuḷ
       pakkap pōli oṉpatu vakaippaṭum
       piratti yakka viruttam aṉumāṉa
       viruttam cuvacaṉa viruttam ulōka
       viruttam ākama viruttam appira         29-150
       citta vicēṭaṇam appira citta
       vicēṭiyam appira citta upayam
       appira citta campan tameṉa
       eṇṇiya ivaṟṟuḷ, pirattiyakka viruttam
       kaṇṇiya kāṭci māṟukoḷal ākum
       cattam cevikkup pulaṉaṉṟu eṉṟala
       maṟṟuaṉu māṉa viruttam āvatu
       karuttaḷa vaiyaimā ṟākak kūṟal
       anittiyak kaṭattai nittiyam eṉṟal
       cuvacaṉa viruttamtaṉ colmāṟi iyampal         29-160
       eṉtāy malaṭi eṉṟē iyampal
       ulaka viruttam ulakiṉmāṟu ām
       ilakumati cantiraṉ alla eṉṟal,
       ākama viruttamtaṉ nūlmāṟu aṟaital
       anitta vātiyāy uḷḷavai cēṭikaṉa
       anitti yattainit tiyameṉa nuvaṟala
       appira citta vicēṭaṇam āvatu
       tattam etirikkuc cāttiyam teriyāmai
       pauttaṉ māṟāy niṉṟacāṅ kiyaṉaik
       kuṟittuc cattam vināci eṉṟāl         29-170
       avaṉavi nāca vāti ātaliṉ
       cāttiya vinācamap piracittam ākum.
       appira citta vicēṭiyam āvatu
       etirikkut taṉmi piracittam iṉṟi
       iruttal cāṅkiyaṉ māṟāy niṉṟa
       pauttaṉaik kuṟittuāṉ māccai taṉiyavāṉ
       eṉṟāl avaṉa nāṉma vāti
       ātalil taṉmi appira cittam
       appira citta upayam āvatu
       māṟuā ṉōṟkut taṉmi cāttiyam         29-180
       ēṟātu appira cittamāy iruttal
       pakarvai cēṭikaṉ pauttaṉaik kuṟittuc
       cukammuta liyatokaip poruṭkuk kāraṇam
       āṉmā eṉṟāl cukamumāṉ māvum
       tāmicai yāmaiyil appiracit tōpayam
       appira citta campantam āvatu
       etirikku icainta poruḷcā tittala
       māṟām pauttaṟkuc catta anittam
       kūṟil avaṉṉ koḷkaiaḵtu ākalil
       vēṟucā tikka vēṇṭā tākum.         29-190
       ētup pōli ōtiṉmūṉṟu ākum
       acittam anaikān tikamvirut tameṉa
       upayā cittam aṉṉiyatarā cittam
       cittā cittam ācirayā cittam
       eṉanāṉku acittam upayā cittam
       cātaṉa ētu iruvarkkum iṉṟic
       cattam anittam kaṇpulattu eṉṟala
       aṉṉiyatarā cittam māṟāy niṉṟāṟku
       uṉṉiya ētu aṉṟāy oḻitala
       cattam ceyaluṟal anittam eṉṉiṉa         29-200
       citta veḷippāṭu allatu ceyaluṟala
       uytta cāṅkiyaṉukku acittam ākum
       cittā cittam āvatu
       ētuc caṅkaya māyccā tittala
       āvi paṉieṉa aiyuṟā niṉṟē
       tūya pukaineruppu uṇṭueṉat tuṇital
       ācirayā cittam māṟā ṉavaṉukku
       ēṟṟa taṉmi iṉmai kāṭṭutal
       ākācam, catta kuṇattāl poruḷām eṉṉiṉ
       ākā camporuḷ allaeṉ pāṟkut         29-210
       taṉmi acittam anaikān tikamum
       cātā raṇamacā tāraṇam capakkaika
       tēca virutti vipakka viyāpi
       vipakkaika tēca virutti capakka
       viyāpi upayaika tēca virutti
       virutta viyapi cārieṉṟu āṟu
       cātāraṇam capakka vipakkat tukkum
       ētup potuvāy iruttal cattam
       anittam aṟiyap paṭutaliṉ eṉṟāl
       aṟiyap paṭutalnit tānittam iraṇṭukkum         29-220
       ceṟiyum kaṭampōl anittattu aṟivō
       ākā campōla nittattu aṟivō
       eṉṉal acātā raṇamā vatutāṉ
       uṉṉiya pakkattu uṇṭām ētuc
       capakka vipakkam tammiliṉ ṟātal
       cattam nittam kēṭkap paṭutaliṉ
       eṉṉil kēṭkap paṭaleṉum ētup
       pakkat tuḷḷa tāyi allatu
       capakka vipakkattu mīṭcittu ātaliṉ
       caṅkayam eyti anēkān tikamām         29-230
       capakkaika tēca virutti vipakka
       viyāpi yāvatu ētuc capakkattu
       ōriṭattu eyti vipakkattu eṅkum
       uṇṭātal ākum cattam ceyaliṭait
       tōṉṟā tākum anittam ākaliṉ
       eṉṟāl anittam eṉṟa ētuc
       ceyaliṭait tōṉṟā maikkuc capakkam
       miṉṉiṉum ākā cattiṉum miṉṉiṉ
       nikaḻntuā kācattil kāṇātu ākaliṉ
       anittam kaṭātiyiṉ ottalil kaṭampōl         29-240
       aḻintu ceyalil tōṉṟumō miṉpōl
       aḻintu ceyalil tōṉṟā tōeṉal
       vipakkaika tēca virutti capakka
       viyāpi yāvatu ētu vipakkattu
       ōriṭattu uṟṟuc capakkattuottu iyaṟal
       cattam ceyaliṭait tōṉṟum anittamā taliṉeṉiṉ
       anitta ētuc ceyaliṭait tōṉṟaṟku
       vipakka ākā yattiṉum miṉṉiṉum
       miṉṉiṉ nikaḻntuā kācattuk kāṇātu
       capakkak kaṭātikaḷ tammil         29-250
       eṅkumāy ēkāntam alla miṉpōl
       anittamāyc ceyaliṭait tōṉṟātō kaṭampōl
       anittamāyc ceyaliṭait tōṉṟu mōeṉal
       upayaika tēca virutti ētuc
       capakkat tiṉumvipak kattiṉum āki
       ōrtē cattu varttittal cattam
       nittam amūrttam ātaliṉ eṉṉiṉ
       amūrtta ētu nittat tiṉukkuc
       capakkaā kāca paramā ṇukkaḷiṉ
       ākā cattu nikaḻntu mūrttamām         29-260
       paramā ṇuviṉnika ḻāmai yāṉum
       vipakka māṉa kaṭacukā tikaḷil
       cukattu nikaḻntu kaṭattuoḻin tamaiyiṉum
       ēkatē cattu nikaḻvatuē kāntamaṉṟu
       amūrttam ākācam pōla nittamō
       amūrtta cukampōl anitta mōeṉal
       virutta viyapicāri tiruntā ētuvāy
       virutta ētuviṟ kumiṭam koṭuttal
       cattam anittam ceyaliṭait tōṉṟaliṉ
       otta teṉiṉac ceyaliṭait tōṉṟaṟkuc         29-270
       capakkamāy uḷḷa kaṭāti niṟkac
       cattam nittam kēṭkap paṭutalil
       cattat tuvampōl eṉaccāṟ ṟiṭutal
       iraṇṭiṉum caṅkayamāy ēkāntam alla
       viruttam taṉṉait tiruttaka viḷampil
       taṉmac corūpa viparīta cātaṉam
       taṉma vicēṭa viparīta cātaṉam
       taṉmic corūpa viparīta cātaṉam
       taṉmi vicēṭa viparīta cātaṉam
       eṉṉa nāṉku vakaiyatu ākumat         29-280
       taṉmac corūpa viparīta cātaṉam
       coṉṉa ētuvil cāttiya taṉmattu
       uruvam keṭutal cattam nittam
       paṇṇap paṭutaliṉ eṉṟāl paṇṇap
       paṭuvatu anittamā talilpaṇṇap paṭṭa
       ētuc cāttiya taṉmanit tattaiviṭṭu
       anittam cātitta lāṉvipa rītam
       taṉma vicēṭa viparīta cātaṉam
       coṉṉa ētuc cāttiya taṉmam
       taṉṉiṭai vicēṭam keṭaccā tittal         29-290
       kaṇmutal ōrkkum intiri yaṅkaḷ
       eṇṇil parārttam tokkuniṟ ṟaliṉāl
       cayaṉā caṉaṅkaḷ pōla eṉṟāl
       tokku niṟṟaliṉ eṉkiṉṟa ētuc
       cayaṉā caṉattiṉ parārttampōl kaṇmutal
       intiyaṅ kaḷaiyum parārttattil cātittuc
       cayaṉā caṉavā ṉaippōl ākik
       kaṇmutal intiyat tukkum paraṉāyc
       cātik kiṟanira avayavamāy uḷḷa
       āṉmā vaiccā vayava mākac         29-300
       cātit tuccāt tiyataṉ mattiṉ
       vicēṭam keṭutta liṉvipa rītam
       taṉmic corūpa viparīta cātaṉam
       taṉmi uṭaiya corupamāt tirattiṉai
       ētut tāṉē viparītap paṭuttal
       pāvam tiraviyam kaṉmam aṉṟu
       kuṇamum aṉṟuet tiraviyam āmek
       kuṇakaṉ mattuuṇ maiyiṉvē ṟātalāl
       cāmā ṉiyavicē ṭampōl eṉṟāl
       poruḷum kuṇamum karumamum oṉṟāy         29-310
       niṉṟavaṟ ṟiṉiṭai uṇmaivē ṟātalāl eṉṟu
       kāṭṭap paṭṭa ētu mūṉṟiṉuṭai
       uṇmai vēṟu paṭuttum potuvām
       uṇmai cāttiyattu illā maiyiṉum
       tiṭṭān tattil cāmāṉiyam vicēṭam
       pōkkip piṟituoṉṟu illāmai yāṉum
       pāvam eṉṟu pakarntataṉ miyiṉai
       apāvam ākkuta lāṉvipa rītam
       taṉmi vicēṭa viparīta cātaṉam
       taṉmi vicēṭa apāvam cātittal         29-320
       muṉṉam kāṭṭap paṭṭa ētuvē
       pāvamā kiṉṟatu karuttā vuṭaiya
       kiriyaiyum kuṇamumām ataṉai viparītam
       ākkiyatu ātalāl taṉmi vicēṭam
       keṭuttatu, tīya eṭuttukkāṭṭu āvaṉa
       tāmē tiṭṭānta āpā caṅkaḷ
       tiṭṭān tamiru vakaippaṭum eṉṟumuṉ
       kūṟap paṭṭaṉa iṅkaṇ avaṟṟuḷ
       cātaṉ miyatiṭ ṭāntaā pācam
       ōtil aintu vakaiuḷa tākum         29-330
       cātaṉa taṉma vikalamum cāttiya
       taṉma vikalamum upaya taṉma
       vikalamum anaṉṉu vayavipa rītāṉ
       ṉuvayam eṉṉa, vaitaṉ miyatiṭ
       ṭānta āpā camumai vakaiya
       cātti yāvi yāvi rutti
       cāta ṉāvi yāvi rutti
       upayāvi yāvi ruttiav vetirēkam
       viparīta vetirēkam eṉṉa, ivaṟṟuḷ
       cātaṉa taṉma vikalam āvatu         29-340
       tiṭṭān tattil cātaṉam kuṟaivatu
       cattam nittam amūrttam ātalāṉ
       yātoṉṟu yātoṉṟu amūrttamatu nittam
       ātalāl kāṇpuṟṟatu paramāṇu vileṉil
       tiṭṭānta tappara māṇu
       nittat tōṭu amūrttam ātalāl
       cāttiya taṉma nittattuvam nirampic
       cātaṉa taṉmaamūrt tattuvam kuṟaiyum
       cāttiya taṉmam vikalam āvatu
       kāṭṭap paṭṭa tiṭṭān tattil         29-350
       cāttiya taṉmam kuṟaivu paṭutal
       cattam nittam amūrttam ātalāl
       yātoṉṟu yātoṉṟu amūrttamatu nittam
       putti pōol eṉṟāl
       tiṭṭānta mākak kāṭṭap paṭṭa
       putti amūrttam āki niṉṟē
       anittam ātalāl cātaṉa amūrttattuvam
       nirampic cāttiyam nittattuvam kuṟaiyum
       upaya taṉma vikalam āvatu
       kāṭṭap paṭṭa tiṭṭān tattilē         29-360
       cāttiya cātaṉam iraṇṭum kuṟaital
       aṉṟiyum atutāṉ caṉṉum acaṉṉum
       eṉṟuiru vakaiyām ivaṟṟuḷcaṉ ṉāuḷa
       upaya taṉma vikalam āvatu
       uḷḷa poruḷkaḷ cāttiya cātaṉam
       koḷḷum iraṇṭum kuṟaiyak kāṭṭutal
       cattam nittam amūrttam ātalāṉ
       yātoṉṟu yātoṉṟu amūrttamatu nittam
       kaṭampōl eṉiltiṭ ṭānta mākak
       kāṭṭap paṭṭakaṭam tāṉuṇ ṭākic         29-370
       cāttiya māyuḷa nittam tuvamum
       cātaṉa māyuḷa amūrttattu vamumkuṟaiyum
       acaṉṉā uḷḷa upayataṉma vikalam
       illāp poruḷkaṇ cāttiya cātaṉam
       eṉṉum iraṇṭum kuṟaiyak kāṭṭutal
       cattam anittam mūrttam ātalāṉ
       yātoṉṟu yātoṉṟu mūrttamatu anittam
       ākācam pōleṉum tiṭṭān tattuc
       cāttiya taṉmamāy uḷḷa anittamum
       cātaṉa taṉmamāy uḷḷa mūrttamum         29-380
       iraṇṭum ākācam acattueṉ pāṉukku
       ataṉkaṇ iṉmai yāṉē kuṟaiyum
       uṇṭueṉ pāṉukku ākācam nittam
       amūrttam ātalāl avaṉukkum kuṟaiyum
       anaṉṉuvayam āvatu cātaṉa cāttiyam
       tammiṉ kūṭṭa māttiram collātē
       iraṇṭa ṉuṭaiya uṇmaiyaik kāṭṭutal
       cattam anittam kiruttam ātaliṉ
       yātoṉṟu yātoṉṟu kiruttamatu anittameṉum
       aṉṉuvayam collātu kuṭattiṉ kaṇṇē         29-390
       kirutta anittam kāṇap paṭṭa
       eṉṟāl aṉṉuvayam teriyā tākum
       viparītāṉ ṉuvayam viyāpakat tuṭaiya
       aṉṉuvayat tālē viyāppiyam vitittal
       cattam anittam kiruttat tāleṉiṉ
       yātoṉṟu yātoṉṟu kiruttam anittameṉa
       viyāpakat tālviyā pakattaik karutātu
       yātoṉṟu yātoṉṟu anittamatu kiruttameṉa
       viyāpakat tālviyāp piyattaik karututal
       appaṭik karutiṉ viyāpakam viyāppiyattai         29-400
       iṉṟiyum nikaḻta liṉvipa rītamām.
       vaitaṉmiya tiṭṭān tattuc
       cātti yāviyā virutti yāvatu
       cātaṉa taṉmam mīṇṭu
       cāttiya taṉmam mīḷātu oḻital
       cattam nittam amūrttattu eṉṟāl
       yātoṉṟu yātoṉṟu nittamum aṉṟuatu
       amūrttamum aṉṟu paramāṇup pōleṉiṉ
       appaṭit, tiṭṭānta mākak kāṭṭap paṭṭa
       paramāṇu nittamāy mūrttam ātaliṉ         29-410
       cātaṉa amūrttam mīṇṭu
       cāttiya nittam mīḷātu oḻital
       cātaṉāviyā virutti yāvatu
       cāttiya taṉmam mīṇṭu
       cātaṉa taṉmam mīḷātu oḻital
       cattam nittam amūrttattu eṉṟāl
       yātoṉṟu yātoṉṟu nittam aṉṟu aḵtu
       amūrttamum aṉṟu kaṉmampōl eṉṟāl
       vaitaṉ miyatiṭ ṭānta mākak
       kāṭṭap paṭṭa kaṉmam         29-420
       amūrttamāy niṉṟē anittam ātaliṉ
       cāttiya māṉa nittiyam mīṇṭu
       cātaṉa māṉa amūrttam mīḷātu
       upayāvi yāvirutti kāṭṭap paṭṭa
       vaitaṉ miyatiṭ ṭāntatti ṉiṉṟu
       cātaṉa cāttiyaṅkaḷ mīḷāmai aṉṟiyum
       uṇmaiyiṉ upayā viyāvi rutti
       iṉmaiyiṉ upayā viyāvi rutti
       eṉairu vakai uṇmaiyiṉ
       upayāvi yāvirutti uḷḷa poruḷkaṇ         29-430
       cāttiya cātaṉam mīḷā tapaṭi
       vaitaṉ miyatiṭ ṭāntam kāṭṭal
       cattam nittam amūrttam ātaliṉ
       eṉṟāṟku yātoṉṟu yātoṉṟu nittamaṉṟu
       amūrttamum aṉṟuā kācampōl eṉṟāl
       vaitaṉmiya tiṭṭānta mākak kāṭṭappaṭṭa
       ākā camporuḷ eṉpāṟku
       ākācam nittamum amūrttamum ātalāṉ
       cāttiya nittamum cātaṉamā uḷḷa
       amūrttamum iraṇṭum mīṇṭila iṉmaiyiṉ         29-440
       upayāvi yāvirutti yāvatu
       cattam anittam mūrttam ātalāṉ
       eṉṟaiṭattu yātoṉṟu yātoṉṟu anittam
       mūrttamum aṉṟuā kācam pōleṉa
       vaitaṉ miyatiṭ ṭāntam kāṭṭil
       ākā camporuḷ allaeṉ pāṉukku
       ākācan tāṉē uṇmaiyiṉ maiyiṉāl
       cāttiya anittamum cātaṉa mūrttamum
       mīṭciyum mīḷā maiyumilai yākum
       avveti rēkam āvatu cāttiyam         29-450
       illā viṭattuc cātaṉam iṉmai
       collātē viṭutal ākum cattam
       nittam paṇṇap paṭāmaiyāl eṉṟāl
       yātoṉṟu yātoṉṟu nittam aṉṟu
       paṇṇap paṭuvatu allā tatuvum
       aṉṟueṉum ivveti rēkam teriyac
       collātu kuṭattiṉ kaṇṇē paṇṇap
       paṭutalum anittamum kaṇṭēm ātalāṉ
       eṉṉiṉ vetirē kamteri yātu
       viparīta vetirēkam āvatu         29-460
       pirivait talaitaṭu māṟāc collutal
       cattam nittam mūrttam ātaliṉ
       eṉṟāl eṉṟu niṉṟa iṭattu
       yātōr iṭattu nittamum illaiav
       viṭattu mūrttamum illai eṉātē
       yātōr iṭattu mūrttamum illaiav
       viṭattu nittamum illai eṉṟāl
       vetirēkam māṟu koḷḷum eṉakkoḷka
       nāṭṭiya ippaṭit tīyacā taṉattāl
       kāṭṭum aṉumāṉa āpā cattiṉ         29-470
       meyyum poyyum ittiṟa vitiyāl
       aiyam iṉṟi aṟintukoḷ āyntueṉ.
       tavattiṟam pūṇṭu tarumam kēṭṭa kātai muṟṟiṟṟu.
       -----------

             Chapter 29. Manimekalai learns dharma from Aravanar
       Aravanar heard what the young creeper like Manimekalai said,
       praised her
       and told her the story of the king Killivalai and Peelivalai. .
       Story of Nedungilli and Peelivalai.
       Nedungilli, the king with victorious spear
       married Peelivalai, the daughter of the king of Naganādu.
       She gave birth to a son.
       She gave the child in an island and gave him to a carpet merchant.
       He was very happy to receive the child
       and took him in a boat.
       On the way the boat sunk.
       The carpet merchant escaped and searched for the child
       but he could not find him. 29-010
       The boatman went to the king and told the king
       that his child was lost.
       The king searched for his son
       and forgot to perform the festival of Indra.
       A sage told Manimekalai
       that the goddess Manimekalai is good
       and that her father Kovalan named her after the goddess. 29-030
       The goddess Manimekalai came in a dream to Mādhavi
       and told her the reason for her name.
       Since the festival for Indra had been stopped,
       the goddess Manimekalai cursed the city of Pukār
       and it plunged into ocean.
       Aravanar said he and Manimekalai’s mothers left Pukār
       and had come here.
       Deepathigai who worshiped the Buddha Peedihai
       that shines like gold asked Manimekalai’s mothers to go
       to Pukār because she thought Pukār would be destroyed. 29-040
       Manimekalai asked Aravanar,
       “I took a form of a male
       and heard the philosophies of five religions,
       but I have not understood all of them.
       Give me your grace and explain
       the philosophies of the five religions.
       Aravanar said,
       [Translation of the following logical section by George Hart.
       Because of its difficulty, and because I once studied Buddhist
       logic in Sanskrit, I am translating the following section of this
       chapter, where Aravanar gives Manimekalai a lesson on how to make a
       logical argument. For the most part, the author of the Manimekalai
       has translated into Tamil the short Sanskrit Buddhist logic manual
       Nyāyapraveśa, probably written about the 4th century CE by
       Śaṅkarasvāmin (though some attribute the work to Diṅnāga). The
       subject of the work is argumentation, that is, how to prevail in a
       logical dispute. In this system, the major premise is called the
       pakṣa, the minor premise the hetu, and the conclusion is called the
       nigamana. A common example of syllogism would be “all men are
       mortal” (major premise), “Socrates is a man” (minor premise),
       therefore “Socrates is mortal” (conclusion). There is a commentary
       on the Nyāyapraveśa called the Nyāyapraveśavṛtti by Haribhadrasūri,
       and a subcommentary called Nyāyapraveśavṛttipañcikā by Pārśvadeva
       that run to many hundreds of pages and are quite difficult. The
       issues raised in the main text are treated in these commentaries in
       a fashion that demonstrates their extreme complexity.
       In making this translation from the Tamil, I have followed where
       warranted the translation of the Nyāyapraveśa by Musashi Tachikawa
       and have been helped by an article of Brendon Gillon and Martha
       Love entitled “Indian Logic Revisited: Nyāyapraveśa Reviewed.” The
       Tamil author of the Manimekalai has reproduced almost all the
       Sanskrit logical terms of the Nyāyapraveśa in Tamil
       transliteration. For clarity’s sake, I have often added those terms
       in parentheses, since without them the arguments become quite
       difficult to follow. It seems preferable to use the original
       Sanskrit terms (e.g. vyatireka, pakṣa, dharma) rather than the
       Tamil equivalents (etirēkam, pakkam, taṉmam), as the Sanskrit terms
       are clearer and their meaning is more apparent. George Hart]
       Aravanar said,
       O Manimekalai, I will tell you. Listen to this carefully. (29-045)
       The aḷavai (valid sources of knowledge) that the ancient Buddha
       taught are only two—faultless perception (pratyakṣa) and inference
       (karuthu aḷavai).
       Pratyakṣa is pure perception, they say. Name (nāma), kind (jāti),
       quality (guṇa) and action (kriyā) (29-050)
       are found in inference (anumāna, or karuthu aḷavai in Tamil which,
       along with pratyakṣa is one of the two valid sources of knowledge).
       If one investigates ideas (karuttu) about cause (kāraṇa), effect
       (kārya), and what is shared (sāmānya), there can be fallacies, but
       what is not fallacious is the notion of effect, like smoke in fire.
       All the other measures (of logic) belong to inference (anumāna) and
       work through thought (karuttu).
       The five parts of an inference are 1. subject (pakṣa), 2. reason
       (hetu — or minor premise), 3. example (dṛṣṭānta), 4. application
       (upanaya) and 5. conclusion (nigamana).
       1. Among these, the subject (pakṣa) is saying, “This mountain has
       fire.” (Here the pakṣa is “mountain,” and “fire” is the qualifier
       that one wishes to prove is part of the pakṣa).
       2. The reason (hetu) is saying, “Because it has smoke.” (29-060)
       3. The example (dṛṣṭānta) is saying, “Like a proper kitchen.”
       4. The application (upanaya) is saying, “And the hill (like the
       kitchen) has fire.”
       5. The conclusion (nigamana) is saying, “What has smoke has fire.”
       When we say, “Anything without fire does not have smoke, like
       water,” there is (in the example) negative concomitance to the
       subject we wish (to establish) and it is an example in which the
       subject is not concomitant (vaidharmya dṛṣṭānta).
       If we have pure nature of something (svabhāva) with a pure effect
       (kārya) as its reason (hetu), it is like saying “sound is not
       eternal.” Here, the statement (i.e. reason) “because the subject
       (sound) is made” (29-070) is the attribution (vacana) of a quality
       (the dharma—“being made”) to the subject. “Whatever is made is not
       eternal like a pot” is a sapakṣa example (having the same subject,
       since a pot, the example, is made). “Whatever is not eternal is not
       made like sky (ākāśa)” is a statement of negative concomitance
       (vipakṣa toṭarcci mīṭci moḻi—since the sky is not made and is a
       vipakṣa example).
       Valid knowledge from something that has no connection (ananvayattil
       pramāṇa) is “in this empty space there is no pot,” and the desired
       subject (pot) does not appear.
       A statement of positive concomitance (pakṣa dharma vacana) (29-080)
       is “Because it does not exist, we have not seen a rabbit horn.” The
       sapakṣa (example that has the same subject) for this would be
       “Whatever exists has an appearance, like a nelli fruit in the
       hand.” These sorts of reasons (hetu’s) prove the proposition.
       If one asks, “What does smoke, which is the effect, prove,” (fire
       is proved) by the concomitance (anvaya), “where there is smoke
       there is fire,” and by the negative concomitance (ananvaya), which
       is the the opposite (vyatireka), “Where there is no fire there is
       no smoke.” If you say “smoke establishes that there is fire,
       (29-090) because the effect coming from fire is a dark twisting
       mass happening as smoke,” then when there is black smoke going up
       that should establish that there is fire.
       (But) if concomitance (anvaya) (always) proves something, one might
       say,”Before one saw the concomitance of a donkey and courtesan both
       in one place at one time, (29-100) and therefore afterwards one
       should infer that where one sees a donkey there should be a
       courtesan.” That is wrong.
       If one says, “Where there is no fire there is no smoke,” that
       establishes the opposite (vyatireka) (i.e. that where there is
       smoke there is fire), but if one says, “On the neck of a donkey
       that has no dog’s tail one sees there is no fox’s tail,” if one
       infers from that that in another place because there is a fox’s
       tail there must be a dog’s tail, that is wrong.
       (Thus, since above we see in the examples of the courtesan and the
       fox’s tail that inference can be fallacious, we will investigate
       below the ways in which inference can be correct and incorrect).
       Application (upanaya) and conclusion (nigamana), which are among
       (the five elements of syllogism), are subsumed by example
       (dṛṣṭānta). (29-110) The subject matter (pakṣa), reason (hetu) and
       example (dṛṣṭānta) can all be valid or invalid.
       A valid subject (pakṣa) is something that has in itself being
       different because it is different from other objects and that has
       the quality (dharma—superstratum) that is to be established and
       also is an object (dharmi—substratum) that is apparent. This is to
       be learned. For example, “Is sound eternal or non-eternal”— in
       discovering which of these is correct, (29-120) the object (dharmi)
       is sound and the quality to be established is eternalness or
       non-eternalness.
       A good reason (hetu) for a stated subject (pakṣa) is threefold:
       appearing as established (i.e. not like a rabbit’s horn),
       being in the similar thing (sapakṣa),
       and not being in a dissimilar thing (vipakṣa).
       If one is to establish being in a similar thing (sapakṣa), it
       should share in common with the object of comparison the quality
       (in the example). Thus if one is to prove sound is non-eternal
       (because it is not made), (29-130) one might say (as a sapakṣa
       example) that it is non-eternal like a pot etc. and if one shows
       the opposite case (vipakṣa), one would say whatever is not
       non-eternal is not made like the sky. The thing to be determined
       (pakṣa) appears in the action of making and it is in the similar
       thing (sapakṣa—the pot) and not in the thing that is dissimilar
       (vipakṣa—the sky). For non-eternalness the reason (hetu—being made)
       is confirmed (by these two examples).
       Faultless examples (dṛṣṭānta) are two sorts: where qualities are
       shared (sādharmya) and not shared (vaidharmya). The one in which
       they are shared is where there is concomitance, as saying a pot
       etc. is non-eternal, while an example where qualities are not
       shared (29-140) is when there is no quality of the of the thing to
       be proved in the object (used for the example—the sky). These are
       what is needed for a good proof.
       There can be a bad subject (pakṣa), a bad reason (hetu) and a bad
       example (dṛṣṭānta). These include subject (pakṣa) fallacy (pōli),
       reason (hetu) fallacy and example (dṛṣṭānta) fallacy.
       Among these, subject fallacy is of nine kinds:
       1. contradicted by perception (pratyakṣa),
       2. contradicted by inference (anumāna),
       3. contradicted by one’s own statement (svavacana),
       4. contradicted by common knowledge (loka),
       5. contradicted by traditional doctrine (āgama),
       6. a subject (pakṣa) in which the qualifier is not admitted to
       exist (aprasiddha viśeṣaṇa),
       7. a subject in which the the thing qualified is not admitted to
       exist (aprasiddha viśeṣya) (29-150)
       8. a subject in which both the qualifier and the qualified are not
       admitted to exist (ubhaya) and
       9. a subject in which the relationship (between the qualifier and
       the qualified) is well-established (and does not need to be shown)
       (aprasiddha sambandha).
       Among these are the following examples:
       1. Contradicted by perception would be saying, “sound is not
       perceptible to the ear.”
       2. Contradicted by inference is saying something contrary to valid
       means of knowledge (karuttu aḷavai), such as calling a non-eternal
       pot eternal. (29-160)
       3. Contradicted by one’s own statement is speaking against one’s
       own words, as “My mother is barren.”
       4. Contradicted by common knowledge is speaking against the world,
       as in “The shining moon is not the moon.”
       5. Contradicted by traditional doctrine is speaking against one’s
       own doctrines (nūl), such as a Vaiśeṣika who believes in
       impermanence saying, “Non-eternalness is eternal.”
       6. A subject in which the qualifier is not admitted to exist is
       when one’s opponent does not acknowledge the (existence) of the
       thing to be proved. If a Buddhist says to a Sāṅkhya opponent,
       “Sound is impermanent,” (29-170) because he (the Sāṅkhya) believes
       (everything is) permanent, the thing to be proved, “impermanence”
       is something whose existence is not acknowledged.
       7. A subject in which the qualifier is not admitted to exist is
       when the thing qualified (dharmi, substratum) is not admitted to
       exist as when a Sāṅkhya says to a Buddhist opponent, “The soul is
       sentient.” Because the Buddhist does not acknowledge the existence
       of a soul (ātma), the qualified thing is something whose existence
       is not acknowledged.
       8. A subject in which both (qualifier and qualified) are not
       acknowledged (29-180) to exist is when the opponent does not accept
       the qualified to be established and thinks it does not exist, as
       when a Vaiśeṣika says to a Buddhist, “The cause for the assemblage
       of (emotions) such as joy etc. is the self.” Because (the Buddhist)
       does not accept the existence of the self or of (an emotion such
       as) pleasure, this is a subject in which both are not acknowledged.
       9. A subject proving something that the opponent accepts would be
       if one says to a Buddhist opponent, “Sound is impermanent.” Because
       he (the Buddhist) accepts that proposition, it does not need to be
       established.
       When we consider invalid reasons (hetu’s), there are three:
       (29-190)
       1. unrecognized (asiddha),
       2. inconclusive (anaikāntika) and
       3. contradicted (viruddha).
       Unrecognized reasons are as follows:
       1. A reason that is unrecognized by both the proponent and the
       opponent (ubhaya asiddha),
       2. a reason that is unrecognized by either the proponent or the
       opponent (anyatara asiddha),
       3. a reason that is unrecognized because its existence is in doubt
       (siddha asiddha) and
       4. a reason that is unrecognized because the thing in which it
       inheres is not admitted (āśraya asiddha).
       Examples:
       1. A reason unrecognized by both: “Sound is impermanent because it
       is sensed by the eye.”
       2. A reason unrecognized by either the proponent or opponent:
       (29-200) if one says, “The production of sound is impermanent,”
       (i.e. sound is impermanent because it is produced), for a Sāṅkhya,
       there is manifestation from the mind, but no causality.
       3. A reason unrecognized because its existence is in doubt. This is
       proving something with a reason that is in doubt, as when one is
       not sure whether he is seeing steam or mist and he claims, “This
       pure smoke (means there is) fire.”
       4. A reason unrecognized because the thing in which it inheres is
       not admitted. This is showing an opponent the lack of existence of
       the thing in which the reason inheres. If one says, “Sky is an
       object because of its quality of sound” to someone who believes sky
       is not an object, the thing (sky) in which which the reason (sound)
       is said to inhere does not exist. (29-210)
       Inconclusive reasons (anaikāntika) are:
       1. a reason common (to both the sapakṣa and vipakṣa examples)
       (sādhāraṇa),
       2. a reason not common (to both of these) (asādhāraṇa),
       3. a reason residing in some sapakṣa and in all the vipakṣa
       (sapakṣaikadeśavṛtti vipakṣavyāpi),
       4. a reason residing in some vipakṣa and in all the sapakṣa
       (vipakṣaikadeśavṛtti sapakṣavyāpi).
       5. a reason residing in both some sapakṣa and some vipakṣa
       (ubhayaikadeśavṛtti), and
       6. a reason that establishes (a set of) contradictory results
       (vṛtta vyabhicāri).
       Examples:
       1. The reason is common to both sapakṣa and vipakṣa. If one says,
       “Sound is impermanent because it is cognized,” being cognized is
       common to both (these sapakṣa and vipakṣa examples): (29-220) “Is
       being cognized of something that is impermanent like a material pot
       (sapakṣa) or is being cognized of something that is eternal like
       the sky (vipakṣa)?”
       2. The reason is not common. The reason that is in the intended
       pakṣa is in neither the sapakṣa or vipakṣa. If one says, “Sound
       (the pakṣa) is eternal because it is heard,” though the reason
       “heard” is in the pakṣa (sound), it is not present in either
       sapakṣa’s or vipakṣa’s (except sound), and the proposition is in
       doubt and is fallacious (because the only thing heard is sound, and
       so there can be no example other than sound). (29-230)
       3. A reason is in some sapakṣa’s and all vipakṣa’s. If you say,
       “Sound does not appear from doing because it is impermanent,” of
       the sapakṣa’s lightning and sky (both of which do not appear from a
       person’s effort), it occurs in lightning but is not seen in sky.
       Because it is impermanent like a pot etc., does it appear from
       effort, and is it thus impermanent (subject to destruction) like a
       pot? Or does it not appear from effort and not be subject to
       destruction like sky? (29-240)
       4. A reason is in some vipakṣa’s and all sapakṣa’s. “Sound arises
       from effort because it is impermanent.” Here the reason,
       impermanence is said to occur from effort, but of the vipakṣa’s sky
       and lightning, (impermanence) is seen in lightning but not in sky
       and it is in all sapakṣa’s like a pot etc. and so is not conclusive
       (29-250) and one asks, “Is (sound) impermanent like the sky because
       it does not arise from effort or is it impermanent like a pot etc.
       because it arises from effort?”
       5. A reason in some of both sapakṣa and vipakṣa. If one says,
       “Sound is eternal because it has no form,” the reason “has no form”
       is meant to imply (the conclusion) “eternal.” The sapakṣa is sky
       and atoms (both of which are eternal). (29-260) Having no form is
       true of sky but not of atoms. The vipakṣa is a pot, happiness etc.
       (which are impermanent). (Lack of form) is in happiness but not a
       pot. Thus the reason appears only in some (sapakṣa’s and vipakṣa’s)
       and so the proposition is fallacious, and one asks, “Is it (sound)
       eternal like sky, which has no form, or is it impermanent like
       happiness that has no form?”
       6. A reason that establishes (a set of) contradictory results. A
       reason that is incorrect gives scope for the reason at hand (i.e.
       two reasons are given and one complements the other in a way that
       produces confusion). If you say, “Sound is impermanent because it
       arises from effort (29-270) like (a pot),” the sapakṣa for arising
       from effort is a pot etc., and if you also say. “Sound is eternal
       because it is heard, like soundness,” these two taken together give
       rise to doubt and are fallacious (because they produce doubt as to
       which is correct).
       If one enumerates properly the presence (of reasons), (there are
       four reasons that are invalid):
       1. a proof that shows opposite of the nature (svarūpa) of the
       superstratum (the thing that inheres—dharma) (dharma svarūpa
       viparīta sādhanam),
       2. a proof that shows the opposite of a quality (viśeṣa) of the
       substratum (the thing inhered in—dharmi) (dharmi viśeṣa viparīta
       sādhanam),
       3. a proof that shows the opposite of the substratum itself (dharmi
       svarūpa viparīta sādhanam) and
       4. a proof that shows the opposite of a quality of the substratum
       (dharmi viśeṣa viparīta sādhanam).
       Among these four, (29-280)
       1. That which shows the opposite of the nature of the superstratum.
       This is the non-existence of the form of the superstratum that is
       to be established by the adduced reason. If one says,”Sound is
       eternal because it is produced,” because what is made is
       perishable, the reason “it is produced” does not apply to
       “eternal,” the quality to be proved, but proves it is perishable
       and so it proves the opposite.
       2. A proof that shows the opposite of a quality of the superstratum
       (in the substratum, or dharmi). This is when the reason adduced
       proves the quality does not exist in the thing in which inheres.
       (29-290) If one says, “The senses such as the eye etc. are, if you
       consider, an aggregate for the sake of something other than
       themselves like (parts of) beds or chairs,” the reason (hetu—“being
       an aggregate") is used to establish that just as (the parts) of a
       bed or chair are for the sake of something else, the eye and other
       senses are for something else, and like the person who uses a bed
       or chair, the soul which has no parts is shown to be different
       (29-300) from the eye and other senses and is thus supposedly
       proved to have parts (because it is also characterized by the hetu
       of being an aggregate). Thus because the property of the
       superstratum which is to be established (that the soul is an
       aggregate) does not apply (since the soul has no parts), this is a
       contradiction.
       3. A reason that shows the opposite of the substratum. This is when
       the reason contradicts the true nature of the substratum. If one
       says, “Existence is not a substance or an act or a quality (29-310)
       because it has one substance and because it exists in qualities and
       action like other qualifiers,” the reason adduced, which is
       “existence is different than substance, quality and action that are
       as one where they (inhere in things)” proves existence is different
       than the three things and does not prove it exists. In the example,
       the common quality is denied and there is no other (common quality)
       and so the substratum, existence, becomes non-existence and so the
       opposite is shown of what is intended.
       4. A proof that shows the opposite of a quality of the substratum.
       (29-320) Above (in #3), the quality of the substratum was shown to
       be non-existence. The reason was existence, but the action and the
       quality of the doer proves the opposite. Thus it makes wrong the
       quality of the substratum.
       Example fallacies are of two sorts. These have been mentioned above
       (similar and dissimilar).
       If one considers the fallacy of examples (where the things adduced)
       are similar (to the thing to be established), there are five kinds.
       (29-330)
       1. Where the reason is not found (sādhana dharma vikala),
       2. Where the thing to be established is not found (sādhya dharma
       vikala),
       3. Neither the reason nor the thing to be established is found
       (ubhaya dharma vikala),
       4. Something that has no connection (ananvaya) and
       5. Something where concomitance is expressed in the reverse order
       (viparītānvaya).
       There are five kinds of fallacious examples where dissimilarity (to
       the thing to be established) is expressed:
       6. Where the thing to be proved is not excluded (sādhya avyāvṛtti),
       7. Where the thing that proves (the hetu) is not excluded (sādhana
       avyāvṛtti)
       8. Where neither is excluded (ubhaya avyāvṛtti),
       9. Where there no statement of being negative (avyatireka) and
       10. Where the negative concomitance is expressed in the reverse
       order (viparīta vyatireka).
       1. Where the reason is not found. The thing that proves the
       proposition is lacking. (29-340) If one says, “Sound is eternal
       because it has no form. Whatever is formless is eternal as one sees
       in an atom,” the atom which is the example has a form along with
       permanence and the superstratum quality (eternalness) which is used
       to establish the proposition is operative (i.e. is present in the
       atom) but the superstratum quality (formlessness, i.e. the reason
       or hetu) that is used to establish the proposition is missing (from
       the atom).
       2. The thing to be established is not found. (29-350) An example is
       “Sound is eternal because it has no form and whatever has no form
       is eternal like the mind.” If one says this, the mind, which is
       shown as the example, does not have a form and is impermanent, and
       thus formlessness (the reason that proves the proposition) is
       operative, but permanence which is to be proved does not.
       3. Neither the reason nor the thing to be established is found.
       (29-360) In an example that is adduced, both the thing to be proved
       and the means of proof are missing. Further, (the examples) can be
       existent or non-existent.
       3.a. In this (ubhaya dharma vikala) in which (the examples) are
       existent, both the thing to be proven (sādhya) and the means to
       prove it (sādhana) are both missing. If you say, “Sound is
       permanent because it does not have form because whatever does not
       have a form is permanent like a pot,” in the pot that is adduced as
       an example (29-370) the quality (dharma) to be proved,
       impermanence, and the quality used to prove, formlessness, are both
       missing.
       3.b. The ubhaya dharma vikala in which there is non-existence. This
       is when the thing to be established and the thing used to establish
       are in a non-existent object. If one says, “Sound is non-eternal
       because it has a form because whatever has a form is non-eternal,
       like sky,” both non-eternal, which is the quality to be proved,
       (29-380) and having form, which is the quality used to prove both
       cannot be in (sky) for a person who believes sky does not exist and
       so the proposition is deficient. And for someone who believes sky
       does exist, because sky is eternal and formless, they do are not in
       the example for him either.
       4. Something that has no connection. This is simply saying the
       thing that proves and the thing to be proved exist without
       describing any connection between them. If you fail to give the
       connection as in, “Sound is impermanent because it is made, because
       anything made is impermanent (thus expressing the connection)”
       (29-390) and just say instead, “in the pot being made and
       impermanence are seen,” the connection (between being made and
       impermanence) is not apparent.
       5. Concomitance is expressed in reverse order. This is prescribing
       a thing pervaded (by a quality) through the connection that
       pervades it. If you say, “Sound is impermanent because it is made,”
       and add, “whatever is made is impermanent,” (that is correct), as
       you consider what is pervaded (something made) by the pervader
       (impermanence), but if you add instead, “whatever is impermanent is
       made,” considering (i.e. reversing) what is pervaded by the
       pervader, because the pervader (something made) can exist without
       (being in) the thing pervaded (impermanence), the concomitance is
       expressed in reverse order. (29-400)
       Among the fallacious examples where there is dissimilarity (to the
       thing to be established),
       6. Where the thing to be proved is not excluded (sādhya avyāvṛtti).
       Here, the quality (dharma) that establishes the proposition (i.e.
       the reason) is missing (from the example), but the quality to be
       established is not. If you say, “Sound is eternal because it has no
       form,” and give the example “Whatever is not eternal is without
       form like an atom,” because the atom that is shown as the example
       is eternal and has a form, (29-410) (the quality that establishes
       the proposition), formlessness, is missing and the thing to be
       proved, eternalness, is not missing.
       7. Where the thing that proves (the hetu) is not excluded (sādhana
       avyāvṛtti). The quality to be established is missing but the
       quality that establishes the proposition is not missing. If you
       say, “Sound is eternal because it is formless,” and give the
       example, “Whatever is not eternal is not formless like action,”
       action that is here shown as a negative example (29-420) is
       formless and non-eternal, and the thing to be proved, eternalness,
       is missing, but the thing that proves, formlessness, is not.
       8. Where neither is excluded (ubhaya avyāvṛtti). This is when
       neither the quality to be proved nor the quality that proves is
       missing, but rather are both present. The ubhaya avyāvrtti is of
       two types determined by whether a thing exists or does not exist.
       (29-430)
       8.a. In the type based on the existence of something, the quality
       to be proved and the one that proves are both present. An example
       of this negative concomitance is, “Sound is eternal because it is
       formless,” with the example, “Whatever is not eternal is not
       formless like sky.” Here, to the one who says, “Sky, which is here
       shown as an example of negative concomitance, is an object,” (the
       reply is) that sky is eternal and formless and therefore the thing
       to be proved, eternalness, (29-440) and the thing that proves,
       formlessness, are both not missing (in sky).
       8.b. In the type based on the non-existence of something, one might
       say, “Sound is not eternal because it has form,” and give the
       example, “Whatever is non-eternal has no form like the sky.” If one
       gives this example of negative concomitance, for someone who
       believes “sky is not an object,” because the existence of sky is
       not true (for him), the thing to be proved, non-eternalness and the
       thing proved, having form are both not excluded and excluded.
       9. (An example in which) there is no statement of being negative
       (avyatireka). (29-450) This is not expressing the absence of the
       thing that proves in the thing to be proved, (i.e. an example of a
       thing dissimilar to what is to be proved without expressing the
       negative relation between the quality in the example and the
       reason). If one says, “Sound is eternal because it is not made,”
       and adds (the example), “whatever is not eternal does not exist
       unless it is made,” the fact that this is negative is not
       expressed. And if one says, “Because we have seen both
       non-eternalness and (the quality of) being made in a pot,” the
       negative relation is not apparent. (29-460)
       10. (An example in which) the negative concomitance is expressed in
       reverse order (viparīta vyatireka). This is when the separation (of
       the reason and example) is expressed in a confused way. If one
       says, “Sound is eternal because it has a form,” and, rather than
       saying, “Wherever there is not eternalness, in that place there is
       no form,” says instead, “In whatever place there is not form, in
       that place there is no eternalness,” here the negatives are
       expressed backwards.
       Thus you may learn and know without doubt (29-470) the truth and
       falsehood of incorrect inference through the means of fallacious
       proofs that we have investigated in this way.
       -----------
                           __________________________

           30. pavattiṟam aṟukeṉap pāvai nōṟṟa kātai
          [ pavattiṟamaṟuka eṉappāvainōṟṟa pāṭṭu ]

       tāṉam tāṅkic cīlan talainiṉṟu
       pōṉa piṟappil pukuntatai uṇarntōḷ
       putta taṉma caṅkam eṉṉum
       muttiṟa maṇiyai mummaiyiṉ vaṇaṅkic
       caraṇā katiyāyc caraṇceṉṟu aṭaintapiṉ
       muraṇāt tiruvaṟa mūrttiyai moḻivōṉ
       aṟivu vaṟitāy uyirniṟai kālattu
       muṭitayaṅku amarar muṟaimuṟai irappata
       tuṭita lōkam oḻiyat tōṉṟip
       pōti mūlam porunti iruntu         30-10
       māraṉai veṉṟu vīraṉ ākik
       kuṟṟam mūṉṟum muṟṟa aṟukkum
       vāmaṉ vāymai ēmak kaṭṭurai
       iṟanta kālattu eṇṇilput tarkaḷuma
       ciṟantuaruḷ kūrntu tiruvāy moḻintatu
       īraṟu poruḷiṉ īntaneṟi uṭaittāyc
       cārpiṉ tōṉṟit tattamil mīṭṭum
       ilakkuaṇat toṭartaliṉ
       maṇṭila vakaiyāy aṟiyak kāṭṭi
       etirmuṟai oppa mīṭciyum āki         30-20
       īṅkuitu illā vaḻiil lāki
       īṅkuitu uḷḷa vaḻiuṇ ṭākalil
       takka takka cārpil tōṟṟameṉac
       coṟṟakap paṭṭum ilakkaṇat toṭarpāl
       karutap paṭṭum kaṇṭamnāṉku uṭaittāy
       maruviya canti vakaimūṉṟu uṭaittāyt
       tōṟṟam pārkkiṉ mūṉṟu vakaiyāyt
       tōṟṟaṟku ēṟṟa kālammūṉṟu uṭaittāyk
       kuṟṟamum viṉaiyum payaṉum viḷaintu
       nilaiyila vaṟiya tuṉpameṉa nōkka         30-30
       ulaiyā vīṭṭiṟku uṟuti yāki
       nālvakai vāymaikkuc cārpiṭaṉ āki
       aintuvakaik kantattu amaiti āki
       meyvakai āṟu vaḻakkumukam eyti
       nayaṅkaḷ nāṉkāl payaṉkaḷ eyti
       iyaṉṟanāl vakaiyāl viṉāviṭai uṭaittāy
       niṉmati iṉṟi uḻpāṭu iṉṟip
       piṉpōk kallatu poṉṟak keṭātāyp
       paṇṇunar iṉṟip paṇṇap paṭātāy
       yāṉum iṉṟi eṉṉatum iṉṟip         30-40
       pōṉatum iṉṟi vantatum iṉṟi
       muṭittalum iṉṟi muṭivum iṉṟi
       viṉaiyum payaṉum piṟappum vīṭum
       iṉaiyaṉa ellām tāṉē ākiya
       pētaimai ceykai uṇarvē aruvuru
       vāyil ūṟē nukarvē vēṭkai
       paṟṟē pavamē tōṟṟam viṉaippayaṉ
       iṟṟueṉa vakutta iyalpuī rāṟum
       piṟantōr aṟiyiṉ perumpēṟu aṟikuvar
       aṟiyār āyiṉ āḻnaraku aṟikuvar         30-50
       pētaimai eṉpatu yātueṉa viṉaviṉ
       ōtiya ivaṟṟai uṇarātu mayaṅki
       iyaṟpaṭu poruḷāl kaṇṭatu maṟantu
       muyalkōṭu uṇṭueṉak kēṭṭatu teḷital
       ulakam mūṉṟiṉum uyirām ulakam
       alakila paluyir aṟuvakaittu ākum
       makkaḷum tēvarum piramarum narakarum
       tokka vilaṅkum pēyum eṉṟē
       nalviṉai tīviṉai eṉṟuiru vakaiyāl
       collap paṭṭa karuvil cārtalum         30-60
       karuvil paṭṭa poḻutiṉuḷ tōṟṟi
       viṉaippayaṉ viḷaiyum kālai uyirkaṭku
       maṉappēr iṉpamum kavalaiyum kāṭṭum
       tīviṉai eṉpatu yātueṉa viṉaviṉ
       āytoṭi nallāy āṅkuatu kēḷāy
       kolaiyē kaḷavē kāmat tīviḻai
       ulaiyā uṭampil tōṉṟuva mūṉṟum
       poyyē kuṟaḷai kaṭuñcol payaṉil
       coleṉac colliṟ tōṉṟuva nāṉkum
       veḵkal vekuḷal pollāk kāṭcieṉṟu         30-70
       uḷḷam taṉṉiṉ uruppaṉa mūṉṟumeṉap
       pattu vakaiyāl payaṉteri pulavar
       ittiṟam paṭarār paṭarkuvar āyiṉ
       vilaṅkum pēyum narakarum ākik
       kalaṅkiya uḷḷak kavalaiyil tōṉṟuvar
       nalviṉai eṉpatu yātueṉa viṉaviṉ
       colliya pattiṉ tokutiyiṉ nīṅkic
       cīlam tāṅkit tāṉam talainiṉṟu
       mēleṉa vakutta orumūṉṟu tiṟattut
       tēvarum makkaḷum piramarum āki         30-80
       mēviya makiḻcci viṉaippayaṉ uṇkuvar
       uṇarvueṉap paṭuvatu uṟaṅkuvōr uṇarviṉ
       purivuiṉṟu ākip pulaṉkoḷā tatuvē
       aruvuru eṉpatuav vuṇarvu cārnta
       uyirum uṭampum ākum eṉpa
       vāyil āṟum āyum kālai
       uḷḷam uṟuvikka uṟumiṭaṉ ākum
       ūṟueṉa uraippatu uḷḷamum vāyilum
       vēṟu pulaṉkaḷai mēvutal eṉpa
       nukarvē uṇarvu pulaṉkaḷai nukartal         30-90
       vēṭkai virumpi nukarcciā rāmai
       paṟṟueṉap paṭuvatu pacaiiya aṟivē
       pavameṉap paṭuvatu karuma īṭṭam
       tarumuṟai itueṉat tāmtām cārtal
       piṟappueṉap paṭuvatuak karumap peṟṟiyiṉ
       uṟappuṇar uḷḷam cārpoṭu katikaḷil
       kāraṇa kāriya urukkaḷil tōṉṟal
       piṇieṉap paṭuvatu cārpil piṟitāy
       iyaṟkaiyiṉ tirintuuṭampu iṭumpai purital
       mūppueṉa moḻivatu antattu aḷavum         30-100
       tākkunilai yāmaiyiṉ tāmtaḷarn tiṭutal
       cākkāṭu eṉpatu aruvurut taṉmai
       yākkai vīḻkatir eṉamaṟain tiṭutal
       pētaimai cārvāc ceykai ākum
       ceykai cārvā uṇarcci ākum
       uṇarcci cārvā aruvuru ākum
       aruvuruc cārvā vāyil ākum
       vāyil cārvā ūṟuā kummē
       ūṟu cārntu nukarcci ākum
       nukarcci cārntu vēṭkai ākum         30-110
       vēṭkai cārntu paṟṟuā kummē
       paṟṟil tōṉṟum karumat tokuti
       karumat tokuti kāraṇa māka
       varumē ēṉai vaḻimuṟait tōṟṟam
       tōṟṟam cārpiṉ mūppuppiṇi cākkāṭu
       avalam araṟṟuk kavalaikai yāṟueṉat
       tavalil tuṉpam talaivarum eṉpa
       ūḻiṉmaṇ ṭilamāc cūḻumin nukarcci
       pētaimai mīḷac ceykai mīḷum
       ceykai mīḷa uṇarcci mīḷum         30-120
       uṇarcci mīḷa aruvuru mīḷuma
       aruvuru mīḷa vāyil mīḷum
       vāyil mīḷa ūṟu mīḷum
       ūṟu mīḷa nukarcci mīḷum
       nukarcci mīḷa vēṭkai mīḷum
       vēṭkai mīḷap paṟṟu mīḷum
       paṟṟu mīḷak karumat tokuti
       mīḷum karumat tokuti mīḷat
       tōṟṟam mīḷum tōṟṟam mīḷap
       piṟappu mīḷum piṟappup piṇimūppuc         30-130
       cākkāṭu avalam araṟṟuk kavalai
       kaiyāṟu eṉṟuik kaṭaiyil tuṉpam
       ellām mīḷumiv vakaiyāṉ mīṭci
       ātik kaṇṭam ākum eṉpa
       pētaimai ceykai eṉṟuivai iraṇṭum
       kāraṇa vakaiya āta lāṉē
       iraṇṭām kaṇṭam ākum eṉpa
       uṇarcci aruvuru vāyil ūṟē
       nukarcci eṉṟu nōkkap paṭuvaṉa
       muṉṉavaṟṟu iyalpāl tuṉṉiya ātaliṉ         30-140
       mūṉṟām kaṇṭam vēṭkai paṟṟuk
       karuma īṭṭam eṉakkaṭ ṭuraippavai
       maṟṟuap peṟṟi nukarcci oḻukkiṉuḷ
       kuṟṟamum viṉaiyum āka lāṉē
       nāṉkām kaṇṭam piṟappē piṇiyē
       mūppē cāvueṉa moḻintiṭum tuṉpam
       eṉaivai piṟappil uḻakkupayaṉ ātaliṉ
       piṟappiṉ mutaluṇarvu ātic canti
       nukarcci oḻukkoṭu viḻaiviṉ kūṭṭam
       pukarcciiṉṟu aṟivatu iraṇṭām canti         30-150
       kaṉmak kūṭṭat toṭuvaru piṟappiṭai
       muṉṉic celvatu mūṉṟām canti
       mūṉṟuvakaip piṟappu moḻiyuṅ kālai
       āṉṟapiṟa mārkkattu āya uṇarvē
       tōṉṟal vīṭueṉat tuṇintu tōṉṟiyum
       uṇarvuḷ aṭaṅka uruvāyt tōṉṟiyum
       uṇarvum uruvum uṭaṅkat tōṉṟip
       puṇartaru makkaḷ teyvamvilaṅku ākaiyum
       kāla mūṉṟum karutuṅ kālai
       iṟanta kālam eṉṉal vēṇṭum         30-160
       maṟanta pētaimai ceykaiyāl avaṟṟai
       nikaḻnta kālameṉa nērap paṭumē
       uṇarvē aruvuru vāyil ūṟē
       nukarvē vēṭkai paṟṟē pavamē
       tōṟṟam eṉṟuivai colluṅ kālai
       etirkā lameṉa icaikkap paṭumē
       piṟappē piṇiyē mūppē cāvē
       avalam araṟṟuk kavalaikai yāṟukaḷ
       kulaviya kuṟṟameṉak kūṟap paṭumē
       avāvē paṟṟē pētaimai eṉṟuivai         30-170
       puṉaiyumaṭai pavamum viṉaiceyal ākum
       uṇarcci aruvuru vāyil ūṟē
       nukarcci piṟappu mūppuppiṇi cāvuivai
       nikaḻccippayaṉ āṅkē nēruṅ kālaik
       kuṟṟamum viṉaiyum payaṉum tuṉpam
       peṟṟa tōṟṟap peṟṟikaḷ nilaiyā
       epporu ḷukkum āṉmā ilaieṉa
       ippaṭi uṇarum ivaivīṭ ṭiyalpām.
       uṇarvē aruvuru vāyil ūṟē
       nukarvē piṟappē piṇimūppuc cāvē         30-180
       avalam araṟṟuk kavalaikai yāṟueṉa
       nuvalap paṭuvaṉa nōyā kummē
       annōy taṉakkup
       pētaimai ceykai avāvē paṟṟuk
       karuma īṭṭamivai kāraṇam ākum
       tuṉpam tōṟṟam paṟṟē kāraṇam
       iṉpam vīṭē paṟṟuili kāraṇam
       oṉṟiya uraiyē vāymai nāṉkāvatu
       uruvu nukarcci kuṟippē pāvaṉai
       uḷḷa aṟivuivai aiṅkantam āvaṉa         30-190
       aṟuvakai vaḻakku maṟuiṉṟu kiḷappiṉ
       tokaiyē toṭarcci taṉmai mikutturai
       iyainturai eṉṟa nāṉkiṉum iyainta
       uṇmai vaḻakkum iṉmai vaḻakkum
       uḷḷatu cārnta uṇmai vaḻakkum
       illatu cārnta iṉmai vaḻakkum
       uḷḷatu cārnta iṉmai vaḻakkum
       illatu cārnta uṇmai vaḻakkumeṉa,
       colliya tokaittiṟam uṭampunīr nāṭu
       toṭarcci vittu muḷaitāḷ eṉṟuin         30-200
       nikaḻcciyil avaṟṟai neleṉa vaḻaṅkutal
       iyalpu mikuttuurai īṟuṭaittu eṉṟum
       tōṉṟiṟṟu eṉṟum mūttatu eṉṟum
       mūṉṟiṉ oṉṟiṉ iyalpumikuttu uraittal
       iyainturai eṉpatu eḻuttuppala kūṭac
       coleṉat tōṟṟum palanāḷ kūṭiya
       ellaiyait tiṅkaḷ eṉṟu vaḻaṅkutal
       uḷvaḻakku uṇarvuil vaḻakku muyalkōṭu
       uḷḷatu cārnta uḷvaḻakku ākum
       cittat tuṭaṉē otta nukarcci         30-210
       uḷḷatu cārnta ilvaḻakku ākum
       cittamuṟ pavittatu miṉpōl eṉkai
       illatu cārnta uṇmaivaḻakku ākum
       kāraṇam iṉṟik kāriyam nērtal
       illatu cārnta ilvaḻakku ākum
       muyalkōṭu iṉmaiyiṉ tōṟṟamum ileṉal.
       nāṉku nayameṉat tōṉṟap paṭuvaṉa
       oṟṟumai vēṟṟumai puriviṉmai iyalpueṉka.
       kāraṇa kāriyam ākiya poruḷkaḷai
       oṉṟā uṇartal oṟṟumai nayamām         30-220
       vīṟṟuvīṟ ṟāka vētaṉai koḷvatu
       vēṟṟumai nayameṉa vēṇṭal vēṇṭum
       poṉṟak keṭāap poruḷvaḻip poruḷkaḷukku
       oṉṟiya kāraṇam utavukā riyattait
       tarutaṟku uḷḷam tāṉilai eṉṟal
       puriviṉmai nayameṉap pukaṟal vēṇṭum
       nelvit takattuḷ nelmuḷai tōṟṟumeṉal
       nalla iyalpunayam ivaṟṟilnām koḷpayaṉ
       tokka poruḷalatu oṉṟuillai eṉṟum
       apporuḷ iṭaippaṟṟu ākātu eṉṟum         30-230
       ceyvā ṉoṭukōṭ pāṭuilai eṉṟum
       eytukā raṇattāl kāriyam eṉṟum
       atuvum aṉṟuatu alātatum aṉṟueṉṟum
       vitimuṟai tokaiyiṉāl virinta nāṉkum
       viṉāviṭai nāṉkuuḷa
       tuṇintu collal kūṟiṭṭu moḻital
       viṉāviṉ viṭuttal vāyvā ḷāmaieṉat
       tōṉṟiyatu keṭumō keṭātō eṉṟāl
       kēṭuuṇṭu eṉṟal tuṇintucolal ākum
       cettāṉ piṟappā ṉōpiṟa vāṉō         30-240
       eṉṟu ceppiṉ
       paṟṟuiṟan tāṉō aṉmaka ṉōeṉal
       mikakkū ṟiṭṭu moḻitaleṉa viḷampuvar
       viṉāviṉ viṭuttal muṭṭai muntiṟṟō
       paṉaimun tiṟṟō eṉakkaṭ ṭuraicey
       eṉṟāl emmuṭṭaikku eppaṉai eṉṟal
       vāyvā ḷāmai ākā yappūp
       paḻaitō putitō eṉṟu pukalvāṉ
       uraikku māṟṟam uraiyātu iruttal
       kaṭṭum vīṭu ataṉkā raṇattatu         30-250
       oṭṭit tarutaṟku uriyōr illai
       yāmmēl uraitta poruḷkaṭku ellām
       kāmam vekuḷi mayakkam kāraṇam
       anittam tukkam anāṉmā acucieṉat
       taṉittup pārttup paṟṟuaṟut tiṭutal
       maittiri karuṇā mutitaieṉṟu aṟintu
       tiruntunal uṇarvāl ceṟṟamaṟ ṟiṭuka
       curuti cintaṉā pāvaṉā taricaṉai
       karuti uyttu mayakkam kaṭika
       innāl vakaiyāl maṉattuiruḷ nīṅkueṉṟu         30-260
       muṉpiṉ malaiyā maṅkala moḻiyiṉ
       ñāṉa tīpam naṉkaṉam kāṭṭa,
       tavattiṟam pūṇṭu tarumam kēṭṭup
       pavattiṟam aṟukeṉap pāvainōṟṟaṉaḷeṉ.
       pavattiṟam aṟuka eṉap kātaimuṟṟiṟṟu.
       pavattiṟam aṟukeṉap pāvai nōṟṟa kātai muṟṟiṟṟu..

                      Chapter 30. Manimekalai’s tapas
       Manimekalai did many good things, performing charity.
       She knew her previous births.
       She followed the dharma of the Buddha Sangha.
       She worshiped the Buddha, one of the three jewels.
       She said the saranāgathi, went to the Buddha
       and took him as her refuge.
       She prayed to the lord of auspicious dharma
       and worshiped the Buddha, the dharma and the sangha
       because all the Buddhas requested
       the lord Buddha to come and help them. 30-010
       The Buddha, victorious, had conquered kāma,
       and rid himself of the three faults of passion, anger and
       confusion.
       The Buddha came from Thudithalogam and was born in this world.
       Aravanar told them how the Buddha had come
       and stayed under the bodhi tree,
       teaching things that would save all lives.
       He said, “I will also tell of all the Buddhas
       who appeared before lord Buddha and their dharma. Listen.
       The dharma and my teaching has twelve parts. 30-020.
       These go away and appear again.
       They appear without reason and their actions are not permanent.
       If they stay their actions stay with them. 30-025
       These have four divisions.
       The first is peedamai (ignorance) and action.
       The second is feelings that arise from things
       that have form and are formless
       and these arise from vāyil, touch and taste.
       The third division is desire, attachment and birth.
       The fourth is birth and the results of karma.
       Births are three—formless, form and passion.
       The kālams are past, present and future.
       The three faults are desire, love for earthly life and ignorance.
       and they cause trouble.
       If one removes these
       that person will receive the wisdom to reach moksha. 30-030
       Truth depends on fourth things:
       sorrow, removing sorrow, the ways of acquiring sorrow,
       and the ways to remove sorrow.
       It is arranged in the five types of divisions.
       It has six types of vazakku.
       It has five divisions (kantham)—form, pain, touch, thought and
       wisdom.
       What are the nidānams? 30-045
       These are twelve: ignorance, action, feeling, form and
       formlessness,
       sense organs, taste, enjoyment, desire, attachment, birth and
       coming into being,
       and the results of action.
       Those who know these know the path to moksha.
       Those who do not know these will go to hell.
       What is ignorance (peedamai)? 30-050
       It is when people do not understand
       all the good things that are said here.
       They are confused and forget the things
       that are taught in kātci alavai and karuthalavai.
       If one says to them, “Rabbits have horns,”
       they think rabbits really have horns
       and do not understand what is real. 30-055
       Limitless humans and other creatures live in the three worlds.
       They are of six kinds: people, devas,
       Brahmas, people in hell, animals and peys.
       Creatures are born in the worlds
       as one the above six kinds according to their good and bad karma.
       When the results of their karma come to them,
       creatures experience happiness and sorrow in their minds. 30-060
       O you adorned with beautiful bracelets,
       if you would know what bad karma is, it is of ten kinds:
       ones that appear in the body—murder, theft, the results of passion;
       ones that appear in speech—lies, gossip, bad words and useless
       words;
       ones that occur in the mind—taking away the things of others,
       getting angry, and seeing evil things.
       Good people do not do these bad deeds.
       If they do, they will be born as animals, peys and naragar
       and suffer in their lives and minds. 30-070
       If you would know what good karma is,
       it is when people do not do all the ten bad deeds.
       They have good qualities.
       They will perform much charity.
       They will be born as gods, people and Brahmas
       and experience the results of their good karma. 30-080
       Unarvu (feeling) is not an action and occurs
       like the experience of someone when he is sleeping.
       Aru and uru (form and formlessness)
       is life and body that have feelings.
       The vāyils are the five sense organs and mind.
       Thoughts occur in the mind
       and manifest in the sense organs that are suitable for them.
       Uuru occurs in the mind and all the five feelings arise in the
       senses.
       Nuhardal is enjoying the senses.
       Veetkai is desiring more and more the enjoyment of the senses.
       30-090
       Patru is attachment to the feelings of senses and desire.
       Pavam is coming into being because of the collection and results of
       actions.
       Pirappu is birth and happens when karma joins the mind
       and appears as cause and result.
       According to one’s karma one will be born in a body.
       Pini, sickness, gives troubles and pain to the body.
       Muppu, old age, is when the body becomes old
       and weak and goes to its end. 30-100
       Sakkadu is when the body that has form and formlessness
       disappears like the sun that sets in the west.
       Because of ignorance action occurs,
       because of action feelings occur,
       because of feelings aruvuru (form and formlessness) occurs,
       because of auruvuru the experience of the senses occurs,
       because of the experience of the senses, enjoyment occurs,
       because of enjoyment more desire occurs,
       because of desire attachment occurs,
       because of attachment the collection of actions occurs, 30-115
       and because of the collection of actions birth and future births
       occur.
       Once people are born, they suffer with old age, sickness, death,
       sorrow, crying and inability to do anything.
       If ignorance goes away, action goes away. 30-120
       If action goes away, feelings go away.
       If feelings goes away, aruvuru (form and formlessness) goes away.
       If aruvuru goes away, the feelings of the sense organs go away.
       If the feelings of the sense organs go away, their enjoyment
       leaves.
       If enjoyment goes away, desires leave.
       If desires go away, attachments leave.
       If attachments leave, the collection of karma does not occur,
       but if the collection of karma occurs, births will occur.
       Once people are born they will be old, get sick,
       sorrow, cry, and be unable to anything. 30-130
       Then they will be born again.
       The kaṇḍams.
       The first kaṇḍam is ignorance and action.
       These are the cause for the others and therefore they are called
       the first kaṇḍam.
       The second kaṇḍam is feelings, form and formlessness,
       sense organs, the experiences that occur because of the sense
       organs
       and the enjoyment of these.
       These occur because of the nature of the first kaṇḍam.
       The third kaṇḍam is desire, attachment and collection of actions.
       Because one enjoys these things, faults and karma occur. 30-140
       The fourth kaṇḍam is birth, sickness, old age, and death
       that occur because one is born. All of these happen in the body
       There are three kinds of sandhis. 30-148
       The first sandhi is the combination of actions and feelings. These
       are the reasons for birth.
       The second sandhi is the combination of enjoyment and desire.
       The third sandhi is the collection of karma and future birth.
       Births are three, formless, with form, and with desire.
       In the first birth one experiences samādhi, knowledge and moksha.
       In the second birth one experiences feelings and the sense organs.
       In the third birth one is born as a god, animal or person with form
       and feelings.
       The kālams are three—past, present and future.
       The past is forgetting everything and the actions that occurred
       because of ignorance.
       The present is experiencing, feelings, aruvuru, the sense organs,
       enjoyments because of the sense organs, desire, attachment and
       birth.
       The future is birth, sickness, old age, death, sorrow,
       worry, sadness, and inability to bear sorrow. 30-170
       Desire, attachment and ignorance are the faults that cause future
       births.
       The results of karma are feelings, aruvuru, the senses,
       feelings of the senses, desire, enjoyment of desires,
       birth, old age, sickness and death.
       The nature of moksha.
       One’s faults, actions and the results of actions give only sorrow.
       If one understands that all creatures, both human and non-human,
       do not have their own soul, that is the path for moksha.
       The vāymais are four.
       The first vāymai is feeling, aruvuru, the sense organs, the
       feelings of the senses,
       the enjoyments of the senses, birth, sickness, old age, death,
       sorrow, crying, sadness and inability to do anything.
       These all give sorrow.
       The second vāymai is ignorance, action, desire, attachment and the
       collection of karma.
       The third vāymai is not to have attachment, which is the cause of
       sorrow.
       The fourth vāymai is not to have attachment, which is the path to
       moksha.
       The kandhams (skandhas) are five—form, feeling, sensation, mental
       activity, and knowledge (awareness).
       The vazakku’s are six:
       l. unmai vazakku,
       2. inmai vazakku.
       3. ulladu sārnda unmai vazakku.
       4. illadu sārnda inmai vazakku.
       5. ulladu sārnda inmai vazakku.
       6. illadu sārnda unmai vazakku.
       Thokai (assemblage) is body, water, and country.
       Paddy is the combination of seed, shoot and stalk.
       Body is the combination of many tātus (things).
       Water is the combination of many drops.
       A country is a combination of many cities.
       The soul is the combination of the five kanthams (skandhas).
       Tanmai mikuttu urai—
       anything will end, it appears and becomes old.
       Tanmai mikuttu urai is to speak emphasizing one of those things.
       Iyaindu urai—
       is not saying many letters make a word,
       but saying that many days make a month (tiṅkaḷ)
       (Months have names but words do not).
       The six vazakku’s:
       1. Uḷ vazhakku. Feelings that occur in the mind.
       2. Saying “Rabbits do not have horns’ is ilvazakku.
       3. Feelings occurring with enjoyment is ulladu sārnda ulvazakku.
       4. Feelings appearing like lightning is illadau sārnda ilvazakku.
       5. A thing without a reason for it is illadu sārnda ulvazakku.
       This is like saying there is no rabbit with a horn.
       6. A thing that doesn’t exist is illadu sārnda unmai vazakku.
       This is like saying no rabbit is born with a horn.
       The four nayangal (causal relations)
       These are the same quality, different quality, not to understand
       the nature of something, natural quality.
       1.The cause and effect of one thing are not different.
       2. Understanding the quality of something in which cause and
       effect are different from each other.
       3. Not to understand the nature of something,
       for example, one can’t understand the cause for the effect of
       mudarporul (a first cause).
       4. Natural cause and effect. The paddy plant comes from its seed.
       Nayatthin payan. The use of causal relationships.
       The results of these four are only understanding
       how both cause and effect combine together to make one quality
       without separate qualities.
       Therefore one should not be attached to these.
       There is no connection (kōṭpāṭu) between an action and the actor.
       An effect may not occur because of its cause.
       It is not cause-effect or it may be cause-effect.
       Four ways to answer a question.
       1. Say the answer for a question bravely without mistakes.
       2. Say the answer part by part.
       3. Say a question as an answer.
       4. Be quiet and do not give any answer.
       1. Say an answer bravely.
       One asks, “Will a thing that has appeared be destroyed?”
       Answer, “Surely it will be destroyed.”
       2. One asks whether someone who has died will be born or not?
       Answer: “If he has no desire he will not be born.
       If he has desires, he will be born.”
       3. If one asks, “Which came first, the seed or the tree?”
       Answer, “Which seed comes from which tree?”
       4. If one asks, “Is the flower blooming in the sky new or old?”
       Answer: do not answer and be quiet.
       Showing jnāna deepam, the lamp of knowledge.
       The four things that take away confusion of mind.
       1. There is no one to tell us the cause of pain and its release.
       The reason for all the things mentioned above
       are passion, anger, and confusion of mind.
       2. One should understand that things are impermanent, they give
       trouble,
       they do not have souls and they have hatred. Therefore one should
       leave them.
       3. Be rid of all hatred and have a good sense of love, compassion
       and doing good deeds.
       Be rid of confusion and consider sruthi, thought, clear
       understanding and doctrine.
       Be rid of the darkness in your mind with these four things!”
       Aravanar Adigal taught these things to Manimekalai and made her
       wise. 30-264
       SUBHAM
     __________________________________________________________________

   This file was last updated on 4 Feb. 2020.
   Feel free to send the corrections to the Webmaster .

References

   1. https://www.projectmadurai.org/
