[pm logo]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

"Bharati Patalkal" - English Translation, edited by Sekkizhar-Adi-p-Podi T.N. Ramachandran part 2 (songs 51-70)  pāratiyār pāṭalkaḷ - āṅkila moḻipeyarppu ti. nā. irāmacantiraṉ (tokuppu), pākam 2(pāṭalkaḷ 51-70) In unicode/utf-8 format

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Acknowledgements:
Our Sincere thanks go to Tamil Virtual Academy for providing a scanned
PDF of this work.
This e-text has been prepared using Google OCR online tool and
subsequent proof-reading of the output file.
Preparation of HTML and PDF versions: Dr. K. Kalyanasundaram, Lausanne,
Switzerland.
© Project Maduri, 1998-2023.
Project Maduri is an open, voluntary, worldwide initiative devoted to
preparation
of electronic texts of tamil literary works and to distribute them free
on the Internet.
Detils of Project Maduri are avilable at the website
https://www.projectmaduri.org/
You are welcome to freely distribute this file, provided this header
page is kept intact.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

BHARATI PATALKAL English Translation - part 2 (verses 51-70) edited by T.N. Ramachandran

Source:
BHARATI PATALKAL
Edited by Sekkizhar Adi-p-Podi T.N. RAMACHANDRAN
TAMIL UNIVERSITY, THANJAVUR Tamil Nadu - India
ISBN: 81-7090-137-5
Tamil University Publication No. : 117
Thiruvalluvar Year 2020; Purattasi - October 1989
Title : Bharati Patalkal :
Editor T. N. Ramachandran
Price : Rs. 100-00
Edition : First - 1989
Press : Tamil University (Offset) Press, Thanjavur - 613 001.
------------
"tarātalattup pāṣikaḷil, aṇṇal tanta
tamiḻp pāṭṭi moḻi peyarttāl teriyum cēti!"
- pāratitācaṉ
------------

uḷḷaṭakkam

  ----------------------------------------------
  51. tuṭikkiṉṟa neñcam
  52. tici
  53. uṉik kūṟap piḻi illi
  54. kaliyu muṭivu
  55. kaṭal
  56. veṟi koṇṭa tāy
  57. vantilarēl
  58. cutantira tēviyiṉ tuti
  59. mātāviṉ tuvajam
  60. nitāṉak kaṭciyār kūṭṭaṭam cutēciyattip paḻittal
  61. pārata tēviyiṉ aṭimi
  62. svatantirap paḷḷu
  63. mahācaktikku viṇṇappam (eṇṇiya muṭital)
  64. mahācakti
  65. mahācaktikku viṇṇappam (mōkattik)
  66. pāratamātā tiruppaḷḷi eḻucci
  67. teḷivu
  68. mahācaktikku viṇṇappam (aṟivilē
  69. cātāraṇa varuṣattut tūmakētu
  70. kaṉavu (pāratiyār taṉvaralāṟu)
  ----------------------------------------------

---------------
51. tuṭikkiṉṟa neñcam
(pārata jaṉaṅkaḷiṉ taṟkāla nili)
(toṇṭic ntu]
neñcu poṟukkutilliyē! inta
      nilikeṭṭa maṉitari niṉittuviṭṭāl
añci yañcic cāvār - ivar
      añcāta poruḷilli yavaṉiyilē,
vañcaṉip pēyka ḷeṉpār - inta
      marattileṉpaca rantak kuḷattileṉpār
tuñcutu mukaṭṭileṉpār - mikat
      tuyarppaṭu vāreṇṇip payappaṭuvār.       (ne) 1
mantira vātiyeṉpār - coṉṉa
      māttiratti lēmaṉak kelipiṭippār?
ya ntirañ cūṉiyaṅkaḷ* - iṉṉum
      ettaṉi yāyira mivartuyarkaḷ!
tanta poruḷikkoṇṭē - jaṉak
      tāṅkula 6kitti laracarellām,
anta araciyali - ivar
      añcutaru pēveṉṟeṇṇi keñcamayarvār       (ne) 2
cippāyik kaṇṭañcuvār - ūrc
      cēvakaṉ varutalkaṇṭu maṉampatippār
tuppākki koṇṭoruvaḷ - veku
      tūrattil varakkaṇṭu vīṭṭi loḷippār.
appā levaṉō celvāṉ - avaṉ
      āṭiyik kaṇṭupayaṅ teḻuntu niṟpār
eppōtuṅ kikaṭṭuvār - ivar
      yāriṭattum pūṉikaḷpō lēṅki naṭappār. (ne) 3
277. neñcu poṟukkutilliyē! - inta
nilikeṭṭa maṉitari niṉittuviṭṭāl.
koñcamō piriviṉikaḷ! - oru
kōṭiyeṉ nālatu peritāmō?
añcutalip” pāmpeṉpāṉ - appaṉ,
āṟutali yeṉṟumakaṉ colliviṭṭāl
neñcu pirintu viṭuvār - piṉpu
neṭunā ḷiruvarum pakittirupmār.       (ne) 4
cāttiraṅka ḷoṉṟumkāṇār - poyc
      cāttirip pēykaḷcolum* vārttinampiyē
kōttiramoṉ nāyiruktālum - ōru
      koḷkiyiṟ pirintavaṉik kulittikaḻvār
tōttiraṅkaḷ colliyivartām - tamic
      cūtuceyu ṉīcarkaḷip paṇintiṭuvār - (āṉāl)
āttiraṅkoṇ ṭēyivaṉcivaṉ - ivaṉ
      aripakta ḷeṉṟuperuñ caṇṭiyiṭuvār.       (ne) 5
neñcu poṟukkutilliyē" - iti
      niṉintu kiṉintiṉum veṟukkutilliyē
kañci kuṭippataṟkillār - ataṉ
      kāraṇaṅka eiviyeṉu maṟivumilār
pañcamō pañcameṉṟē - nitam
      paratavit tēyuyir tuṭituṭittut
tuñci maṭikiṉṟārē - ivar
      tuyarkaḷit tīrkkuvor vaḻimilliyē       (ne) 6
eṇṇilā nōyuṭiyār - ivar
      eḻuntu īṭappataṟkum valimiyilār |
kaṇṇilāk kuḻantikaḷpōl - piṟar
      kāṭṭiya vaḻiyiṟceṉṟu māṭṭikkoḷvār |
naṇṇiya peruṅkalikaḷ - pattu
      nālā yiraṅkōṭi nayantu niṉṟa
puṇṇiya nāṭṭilē - ivar
      poṟiyanta vilaṅkukaḷ pōlāvāḻvār.       ( ne) 7
-------------
51. The Present Condition of the Indians (13-3-1909).
1. It is beyond heart's endurance
When thought hovers on these debased,
They fear, they dread and they perish;
This world for them is full of fear.
"Vile demons hunt this tree -- nay, hunt
That tank--nay, nay, are deep asleep
On the hill-top." Thus they assert
And grieve much, thinking fear-breeding thoughts.
2. They will say: "Lo, the necromancer!"
This sid, gripped by fear they will quake.
Mumbo-jumbo! Thumaturgy:
How many are the troubles of these!
Kings after all govern their subjects
With taxes collected from people;
But to these, the very government
Is dreadful as a fearful ghoul.
3. The sight of soldiers puts fear in them;
Village menials affright them;
When at great distance they see one
With a gun, they will hide in the house.
Someone goes somewhere; eyeing his dress
These stand up and shake in fear.
Before all men, with folded hands,
They ever behave like cringing cats.
4. It is beyond heart's endurance
When thought hovers on these debased.
Are their factions but a very few?
Shall we say: 'Ten million!' Nay, more.
The father says: "A five-headed snake!"
Should his son call it "six-headed"
They are at once sundered, alas!
For years they will remin as foes.
5. They know not the import of sastras
They will believe the words of them
The sastri-fiends but blame him --
The righteous one of their own clan.
Yet will they prise and obey too
The base who are out to trap them.
In wrath they wrangle, dubbing men
As Siva's servitors and Hari's.
6. It is beyond heart's endurance
Yet my thought is untinged by hate.
They do not even have conjee to drink;
They know not the reason therefor.
They wallow in famine and dily
Tremble and suffer in distress
And perish in misery; there is
No way to ward off their sorrows.
7. Their maladies are legion; .
They have no strength to stand or walk;
Like eyeless babes led by others
These too fare forth and get ensnared.
In this country that once fostered
Billions and billions of great arts,
In this very country holy
These vegetate like senseless brutes.
- Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original appeared in Indid. The words used by Bharati in
line 2 of stanza 5 are cāttirip pēykaḷ and not cāttirap pēykaḷ.
----------------
52. tici
orunoṭip poḻuti lōrpat
      toṉpatā yiramāṅ kātam
varutiṟ luṭittāñ cōtik
      kutireṉa vakuppa rāṉṟōr
karutavu mariya tamma!
      katiruṭi virivu maḵtu
parutiyi ṉiṉṟō reṭṭu
      vi nāṭiyiṟ paravu mīṅkē. 1
uṇṭoru vāṉmī ṉaḵti
      yūṇarkaḷ siriya seṉpa
cuṇṭavam mīṉiṉ muṉṉi
      virivoṭu katirtā ṉinta
maṇṭalat teyta mūvāṇ
      ṭāmeṉa matippa rāyiṉ
eṇṭaraṟ keḷitō ammīṉ
      ettaṉi toliya teṉṟē. 2
kēṭṭirō nārkāḷ, vāṉiṟ
      kiṭakkumeṇ ṇariya mīṉiṟ
kāṭṭiya vatutāṉ pūmik
      kaṭukiṉuk kaṇittā meṉpar
mīṭṭumō rāṇṭu mūvā
      mirattiṉil virintōr mīṉiṉ
ōṭṭiya katirtā ṉiṅṅaṉ
      uṟṟiṭum takittu muṇṭē! 3
māṉuṭak kirumi kōṭi
      varuttattāṟ payiṉṟu kaṇṭa
ūṉuṟu karuvi yāliḵ
      tuṇarntateṉ ṟuṇaru vīrāl.
tāṉumik karuvi kāṇat
      takāpperuṅ toliya vāku
mīṉuḷa kōṭi kōṭi
      mēṟpala kōṭi yeṉpar. 4
aṟiveṉum puḷḷu meyttaṅ
      kayarvoṭu mīḷuṅ kaṇṭīr
ceṟiyumit ticitā ṉelli
      yilateṉac ceppu māṟṟam
poṟitavirk turitta laṉṟip
      poruḷiteṉ ṟuḷatti ṉuḷḷē
kuṟitarak koḷḷa lāmō?
      koñcamō ticiyiṉ veḷḷam. 5
------------------
52. Sirius (3-4-1909).
1. In one moment light travels, the scholars say,
Nineteen thousand katam; such is its speed;
It is indeed difficult to comprehend it.
The sun's light reaches us in eight minutes.
2. Westerners speak of a star called Sirius, it is reckoned
That its rays, travelling at the same speed
Take three years to reach this mantala -- the earth;
If so, is it easy for thought to fix its distance?
3. Oh men, hear this! This star among the innumerable stars,
It is sid, is nearest to the earth--a mere millet.
Agin there is a star whose rays take
Three thousand light years to reach the earth.
4. Know that the human insects with manifold pins
Devised but defective instruments to discover these (stars).
And there are billions and billions of stars far, far away
Which cannot be spotted through these tools at all.
5. The bird of intellect that soars returns fatigued;
The dictum that the expansive directions are boundless
Exceeds sense-perception; is beyond mind's comprehension.
Endless indeed is the vastitude of the direction!
-Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original appeared in India. This poem was lost sight of
by all the editors of Bharati's works, so far. It is reproduced for the
first time by the Tamil University.
------------
53. uṉik kūṟap piḻi illi
aṉṉāyivay kuṉikkūṟap piḻiyilli,
      yāmēniṉ aruḷpeṟ ṟōṅka
eṉṉāṉun takutiyilēm mikappollēm
      paḻiyuṭiyēm iḻivu cāṉṟēm
poṉṉāṉa vaḻiyakaṟṟip pulivaḻiyē
      cellumiyal porunti yuḷḷēm
taṉṉālvan tiṭunalattit talirttuppōyt
      tīmiyiṉit taḻuvu kiṉṟēm. 1
elliyilāk karuṇiyuṟun teyvatanī
      yevarkkumaṉa miraṅki niṟpāy
tolliyelāṟ tavirtteṅkaḷ kaṇkāṇa
      noṭippoḻutil turukki māntar
nallaperum pataṅkāṇap purintiṭṭāy
      palakāla īvikoṇ ṭaṉṉār
collariya piḻiceyta tattaṉiyu
      maṟantavarit toḻumpukoṇṭāy, 2
------------
53. We Cannot Blame You (8-5-1909)
1. O Mother, we cannot blame you;
Your grace we are unfit to receive
To flourish; very bad are we,
Base and utterly blame-worthy.
It is not in our nature to tread
The golden path; base ways are ours.
We forsake the good that seeks us
And embrace evil falsity.
2. Endless is your mercy; to all
You show pity; in a bare trice
Banishing all troubles, oh Goddess,
Before our very eyes, you made
The Turks rise to goodly greatness.
Evil-prone, for good many years
They wrought unspeakable crimes foul;
Them you ignored and enslaved them.
3. If for even a split second
With purity thrice-blest, we cannot
Hail you with such words as, "Mother!
Sea of wisdom and grace benign!
Great Goddess! Ens Supreme! Save us!"
And cry out, and are unwilling
To hil your names, but choose to wilt,
Mother, can we ever blame you?
4. Who can protect the insect small
Which into flame willingly falls?
If by grace we put out a lamp
It will wing round and round and then fall
Into another lamp and perish.
If like that we but willingly
Fall into utter perdition
Mother, what is there for you to do?
5. In times past, when you did deign
To grant us all grace, we the brinless,
Did not bid you a warm welcome;
Nor did we choose to adore you;
We fought internecine battles
And were smitten to smithereens.
When now you come agin, we keep
Our visages turned away in shame.
-Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
(To be continued)
Note: The Tamil original appeared in India. Bharati's desire to continue
the poem did not fructify.
------------
54. kaliyuka muṭivu
291. mikappoṉ ṉuṭiyōṉ. mikaatic citaṟuvōṉ
avaṉē valiyaṉāy āṇitāṉ celuttuvaṉ.
pāttiran tavaṟip pimpoṉ vaḻaṅkalē
tavameṉa muṭiyum. tiyalār nāṇilā(tu),
āṭciyi virumpuvar. avaṉiyi yāḷvōr       5
kuṭikaḷi ṉuṭimiyik koḷḷiyiṭ ṭaḻippar,
poyyuri kūṟi vaṇikartam poruḷik
kavarvar, ivvulakat tiṟutimiṉ kaṇṇē
makkaḷiṉ araṉelā mayaṅkiniṉ niṭumāl,
poruṭkāp peṉpatu pōypperuṅ kēṭuṟum.       10
------------
54. The End of Kali Yuga (5-6-1909)
The one that owns much gold will scatter it;
That one, grown strong, will rule with an iron-will.
That will be deemed as tapas to gift away
Gold to the wrong ones; women--all shameless--,
Will desire to rule; they that rule the world
Will loot the subjects and will waste it all.
With false words, they will confiscate the wealth
Of merchants. As the world doth near its end
All piety of people will 'wildered be;
Protection will cease; evil will be afoot.
- Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original appeared in India. The Tamil version is a
rendering of an English poem by Mrs. Flora Annie Steel. Mrs. Steel
composed the poem to deride the budget presented by Lloyd George.
----------
55 kaṭal
kaṭalē kāṟṟip parappukiṉṟatu.virintu cuḻalum pūmippantil paḷḷaṅkaḷilē
tēṅkiyirukkum kaṭal nīr antac cuḻaṟciyilē talikīḻākak kaviḻntu tici veḷiyil ēṉ
citaṟip pōyviṭavilli?
parācaktiyiṉ āṇi. avaḷ namatu talimītu kaṭalvīḻntu viṭātapaṭi ātarikkiṟāḷ.
avaḷ tirunāmam vāḻka. kaṭal periya ēri; vicālamāṉa kuḷam; peruṅ kiṇaṟu; kiṇaṟu nam
taliyilē kaviḻkiṟatā? atupaṟṟiyē kaṭalum kaviḻavilli. parācaktiyiṉ āṇi.
avaḷ maṇṇilē ākarṣaṇat tiṟamiyi niṟuttiṉāḷ. atu poruḷkaḷi nilippaṭuttukiṉṟatu.
mali namatu talimēlē puraḷavilli. kaṭal namatu talimēlē kaviḻavilli. ūrkaḷ kalintu
pōkavilli. ulakam ellā vakiyilum iyal peṟukiṉṟatu. iḵtellām avaḷuṭiya tiruvaruḷ.
avaḷ tiruvaruḷi vāḻttukiṉṟōm.
2
vemmi mikunta piratēcaṅkaḷilirun vemmi kuṉṟiya piratēcaṅkaḷukkuk kāṟṟu
ōṭivarukiṉṟatu. aṅṅakaṉam,ōṭi varumpōtu kāṟṟu mēkaṅkaḷiyum ōṭṭik koṇṭu varukiṟatu.
ivvaṇṇam namakku varum maḻi kaṭaṟ pāricaṅkaḷiliruntē varukiṟatu.
kāṟṟē, uyirk kaṭaliliruntu eṅkaḷukku niṟiya uyir maḻi koṇṭuvā. uṉakkut
tūpatīpaṅkaḷ ēṟṟivikkiṟōm. varuṇā, intirā, nīvir vāḻka ippōtu nalla maḻi peyyumpaṭi
aruḷ puriya vēṇṭum.
eṅkaḷuṭiya pulaṅkaḷellām kāyntu pōyviṭṭaṉa. cūṭṭiṉ mikutiyāl eṅkaḷ
kuḻantikaḷukkum kaṉṟu kālikaḷukkum nōy varukiṟatu.ataṉi māṟṟiyaruḷa vēṇṭum.
pakal nēraṅkaḷilē aṉal poṟukka muṭiyavilli. maṉam ‘hā hā’ veṉṟu paṟakkiṟatu.
paṟavikaḷellām vāṭṭameyti niḻalukkākap pontukaḷil maṟintu kiṭakkiṉṟaṉa. pala
tiṉaṅkaḷāka, mālitōṟum mēkaṅkaḷ vantu kūṭukiṉṟaṉa.
mēka mūṭṭattāl kāṟṟu niṉṟupōy,ōrili kūṭa aciyāmal, puḻukkam koṭitāka
irukkiṟatu. ciṟitu poḻutu kaḻintavuṭaṉ periya kāṟṟukkaḷ vantu mēkaṅkaḷi aṭittut
turattikkoṇṭu pōkiṉṟaṉa. ippaṭip pala nāṭkaḷāka ēmāntu pōkiṟōm.
intirā, varuṇā, aryamā, pakā, mittirā, uṅkaḷ karuṇiyip pāṭukiṟēṉ. eṅkaḷ
tāpamellān tīrntu, ulakam taḻikkumāṟu, iṉpa maḻi peytal vēṇṭum.
--------------
55. To the Sea (12-6-1909)
O grey wild sea,
Thou has a message, thunderer, for me.
Their huge wide backs
Thy monstrous billows rise, abysmal cracks
Dug deep between.
One pale boat flutters over them, hardly seen.
I hear thy roar Call me,
"Why dost thou linger on the shore
With fearful eyes
Watching my tops visit their foam-washed skies?
This trivial boat
Dares my vast battering billows and can float.
Death if it find,
Are there not many thousands left behind?
Dare my wide roar,
Nor cling like cowards to the easy shore.
Come down and know
What rapture lives in danger and o'erthrow."
Yes, thou great sea,
I am more mighty and outbillow thee. .
On thy tops I rise;
'Tis an excuse to dally with the skies.
I sink below
The bottom of the clamorous world to know.
On the safe land
To linger is to lose what God has planned
For man's wide soul,
Who set eternal godhead for its goal.
Therefore he arrayed
Danger and difficulty like seas and made
Pain and defeat,
And put His giant snares around our feet.
The cloud He informs
With thunder and assils us with His storms,
That man may grow
King over pin and victor of o'erthrow
Matching his great
Unconquerable soul with adverse Fate.
Take me, be
My way to climb the heavens, thou rude great sea.
I will seize thy mane,
O lion, I will tame thee and disdin;
Or else below
Into thy salt abysmal caverns go,
Receive thy weight
Upon me and be stubborn as my Fate.
I come, O Sea,
To measure my enormous self with thee.
- Sri Aurobindo
Note: The Poem printed here is the original. Bharati's translation in
Tamil of this poem appeared in India.
---------------
56 veṟi koṇṭa tāy
rākam-āpōki tāḷam-rūpakam
1.
pēyavaḷ kāṇeṅkaḷ aṉṉi-perum
pittuṭi yāḷeṅkaḷ aṉṉi
kāyaḻal ēntiya pittaṉ-taṉik
kātalip pāḷeṅkaḷ aṉṉi. (pēyavaḷ)
2.
iṉṉici yāmiṉpak kaṭalil-eḻuntu
eṟṟum alittiraḷ veḷḷam
taṉṉiṭam mūḻkit tiḷippāḷ-aṅkut
tāvik kutippāḷem aṉṉi. (pēyavaḷ)
3.
tīñcoṟ kavitiyañ cōli-taṉil
teyvika naṉmaṇam vīcum
tēñcori māmalar cūṭi-matut
tēkki naṭippāḷem aṉṉi. (pēyavaḷ)
4.
vētaṅkaḷ pāṭuvaḷ kāṇīr-uṇmi
vēlkiyiṟ paṟṟik kutippāḷ
ōtaruñ cāttiram kōṭi-uṇarn
tōti yulakeṅkum vitippāḷ. (pēyavaḷ)
5.
pāratap pōreṉil eḷitō?-viṟaṟ
pārttaṉki villiṭi oḷirvāḷ
māratar kōṭivan tālum-kaṇam
māyttuk kurutiyil tiḷippāḷ. (pēyavaḷ)
---------------
56. The Frenzied Mother (4-9-1909)
1. Our Mother--a demon is She
Full of frenzy wild and fury.
Her lover is a madman of ire
Whose palm doth sport the blazing fire.
2. In the melodic sea dulcet
Where tossing billows fume and fret
Leaps the Mother in great joyance
And there doth dance in all pleasance.
3. In poesy-hunting Eden
With divine fragrance well-laden,
Decked with flowers of sweet honey
She dances in drunken harmony.
4. The Vedic hymns, in joy, She sings
With Spear of Truth, Her canter rings.
She strews sastras, the Mother kind
Within the reach of all mankind.
5. The Bharat War! How great was it
Blazed Arjuna's bow, by Her lit.
Million heroes opposing, She
Slays in a trice, in gory glee.
- Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original appeared in India.
----------------
57. vantilarēl
vintit tilakarara vintaroṭu pālarpati
cintic citamparamāñ cemmalumē - vaktilarēl
ātaramā maṉṉi vaḷanāṭeṅ kēvantē
mātaramā mantirameṅ kē.
------------
57. On V.O.C. and Others (11-9-1909.)
If there had not been born in India the wondrous Tilak
Aurobindo, Bipin Chandra Pal, Lala Lajpat Rai,
And that good-hearted gentleman Chidambaram, where
Would our fertile and loving mother-country be, where
Would the great mantra-Vande Mataram--be?
- Prof. R.E.Asher
Note: The Tamil original appeared in India. It is prefixed to an article
of
Bharati, entitled "V.O.Chidambaram and Coimbatore-jil".
---------------
58. cutantira tēviyiṉ tuti
itantaru maṉiyiṉ nīṅki
      iṭarmiku ciṟippaṭ ṭālum,
patantiru iraṇṭum māṟip
      paḻimikut tiḻivuṟ ṟālum
vitantaru kōṭi iṉṉal
      viḷinteṉi aḻittiṭ ṭālum
cutantira tēvi! niṉṉit
      toḻutiṭal maṟakki lēṉē. 1
niṉṉaruḷ peṟṟi lātār
      nikarilāc celva rēṉum
paṉṉaruṅ kalvi kēḷvi,
      paṭittuyarn tiṭṭā rēṉum,
piṉṉarum eṇṇi lāta
      perumiyiṟ ciṟantā rēṉum,
aṉṉavar vāḻkki pāḻām,
      aṇikaḷvēy piṇattō ṭoppār.       2
tēvi!niṉ ṉoḷipe ṟāta
      tēyamōr tēya māmō?
āviyaṅ kuṇṭō? cemmi
      aṟivuṇṭō?ākka muṇṭō?
kāviya nūlkaḷ ñāṉak
      kalikaḷ vētaṅka ḷuṇṭō!
pāviya raṉṟō niṉtaṉ
      pālaṉam paṭitti lātār?       3
oḻivaṟu nōyiṟ cāvār,
      ūkkamoṉ ṟaṟiya māṭṭār;
kaḻivaṟu mākka ḷellām
      ikaḻntiṭak kaṭiyil niṟpār;
iḻivaṟu vāḻkki tērār,
      kaṉaviṉum iṉpaṅ kāṇār;
aḻivaṟu perumi nalkum
      aṉṉi!niṉ aruḷpe ṟātār.       4
vēṟu
tēvi!niṉṉaruḷ tēṭi yuḷantavittu
āvi yumtama taṉpum aḷippavar
mēvi niṟpatu veñciṟi yāyiṉum
tāvil vāṉula keṉṉat takuvatē       5
ammi uṉtaṉ arumi yaṟikilār
cemmi yeṉṟiḻi toṇṭiṉic cintippār;
immi yiṉpaṅkaḷ eytupoṉ māṭatti
vemmi yārpuṉ ciṟiyeṉal vēṇṭumē.       6
mēṟṟi cippala nāṭṭiṉar vīrattāl
pōṟṟi niṉṉip putunili yeytiṉar;
kūṟṟi ṉukkuyir kōṭi koṭuttumniṉ
pēṟṟi ṉippeṟu vēmeṉal pēṇiṉar.       7
aṉṉa tammikoḷ niṉṉi aṭiyaṉēṉ
eṉṉa kūṟi icittiṭa vallaṉē?
piṉṉa muṟṟup perumi yiḻantuniṉ
ciṉṉa maṟṟaḻi tēyattil tōṉṟiṉēṉ.       8
pēra ṟattiṉip pēṇunal vēliyē!
cōra vāḻkki, tuyar, miṭi yātiya
kāra ṟukkak katittiṭu cōtiyē!
vīra rukkamu tē!niṉi vēṇṭuvēṉ.       9
-------------
58. Hymn to the Goddess of Liberty
1. Bereft of the comforts of home
Were I to be goled in woe,
Altered, both in estate and wealth
Shame-rife, to fall in disgrace low;
Or a million misfortunes varied
Transpiring were to rout me,
Goddess liberty! even then,
I will not forget to worship thee.
2. Those unblessed of thy divine grace
Be they rich beyond all compare
Be they exalted, versed in lores
Taught and heard, numerous and rare
Besides in innumerable
Virtues others let them excel.
Of what use the life such as theirs?
A dead carcass adorned in jewel.
3. Goddess! the land shorn of thy light
Do we call that a nation? Say,
Will there be life? Have they knowledge
And uprightness? And wealth, have they?
Are there epics? Have they the arts
Scientific, the Vedas? Nay.
To forgo the ministrations
Of thy grace, sinners, aren't they?
4. They will die of incurable sickness
Willless to ken a zest for life;
Insulted even by the brutes
Infamous, they'll stand last in strife;
They know not the life free from blame
Eyeless to joys even in dream;
They, who, devoid of thy grace,
Mother! who gifts immortal fame.
5. Goddess seeking thy grace, distressed in heart,
Those who offer their lives, and also their love
Though, condemned in fell gol, they stand and smart,
They deem it as blameless heavens above.
6. Mother! those who know not thy virtues rare
And think the disgraceful slavery, great.
The golden dome that worldly joys prepare
They must shun as dire gol of hellish state?
7. They of many western lands, a new state
Achieved, through fair courage, appluding thee.
"Lives in crores to Death we will consecrate
To win thy grace" -- so did they cherish thee.
8. Thou, of such wondrous aspect resplendent
Worded how can thy servant hymn thy prise,
Born in a wasting wasted land fragment,
Lost in pride, unhonoured by thy signal grace?
9. Thou strong fence that fends justice great and right!
A life of stealth, sorrows and poverty
Which darkness to quell shine thy rays
Oh Light! Nectar of the heroes! I pray to thee.
- Prof. S.Raman
------------------
59. mātāviṉ tuvajam
pārata nāṭṭuk koṭiyiṉip pukaḻtal
(tāyumāṉavar āṉantakkaḷippu varṇameṭṭu)
pallavi
tāyiṉ maṇikkoṭi pārīr -- atit
tāḻntu paṇintu pukaḻntiṭa vārīr
caraṇaṅkaḷ
1 ōṅki vaḷarntatōr kampam
ataṉ ucciyiṉ mēl vantē mātaram eṉṟē
pāṅkiṉ eḻutit tikaḻum ceyya
paṭṭoḷi vīcip paṟantatu pārīr! (tāyiṉ)
2 paṭṭut tukileṉa lāmō?
atil pāyntu cuḻaṟṟum
perumpuyaṟ kāṟṟu maṭṭu mikuntaṭit tālum
ati matiyātav vuṟutikoḷ
māṇikkapa paṭalam.
3 intiraṉ vacciram
ōrpāl atil eṅkaḷ turukkar
iḷampiṟi ōrpāl (tāy)
mantiram naṭuvuṟat tōṉṟum
ataṉ māṇpi vakuttiṭa vallavaṉ yāṉō?
4 kampattiṉ kīḻniṟṟal
kāṇīr eṅkum kāṇarum vīrar
peruntiruk kūṭṭam
nampaṟ kuriyarav vīrar
taṅkaḷ nalluyir īntum
koṭiyiṉik kāppār.
5 aṇiyaṇi yāyavar
niṟkum inta āriyak kāṭciyōr
āṉantam aṉṟō?
paṇikaḷ poruntiya
mārpum viṟal pintiru vōṅkum
vaṭivamum kāṇīr!
6 centamiḻ nāṭṭup porunar
koṭun tīkkaṇ maṟavarkaḷ,cēraṉṟaṉ vīrar
cinti tuṇinta teluṅkar
tāyiṉ cēvaṭik kēpaṇi ceytiṭu tuḷuvar,
7 kaṉṉaṭar oṭṭiya rōṭu
pōril kālaṉum añcak kalakkum marāṭṭar.
poṉṉakart tēvarka
ḷoppa niṟkum poṟpuṭiyār intu stāṉattu mallar,
8 pūtalam muṟṟiṭum, variyum
aṟap pōrviṟal yāvum maṟappuṟum variyum
cinti tuṇinta teluṅkar
pāril maṟivarum kīrttikoḷ rajaputra vīrar,
9 pañca natattup piṟantōr
muṉṉip pārttaṉ mutaṟpalar vāḻntanaṉ ṉāṭṭār,
tuñcum poḻutiṉuma tāyiṉ
patat toṇṭu niṉintiṭumvaṅkatti ṉōrum,,
10 cērntatik kāppatu kāṇīr
avar cintiyiṉ vīram nirantaram vāḻka!
tērntavar pōṟṟum parata
nilat tēvi tuvajam ciṟappuṟa vāḻka! (tāyiṉ)
------------------
59. The Beauteous Flag of the Mother
1. Behold the gem, the banner of Mother!
Come and humbly adore it and extol.
2. Tall stands the mast, and from its crest
The flag of red silken lustre wafts
With the well-printed dazzling words
Procliming 'Vande Mataram." Behold the gem ...
3. Is it a piece of mere silk? Into it
Blows and twirls a mighty cyclone;
Even when it rages excessively
It wafts serene a ruby-drift. Behold the gem ...
4. Indra's thunder-bolt and young crescent
Of our Muslims bedeck the flag;
At its midst is Mother's mantra;
Its majesty is ineffable. Behold the gem ...
5. Behold them beneath the mast
An immense throng of peerless heroes;
Tried and trusted and brave are these;
They may yield their life, but not the flag.
Behold the gem ...
6. Behold the phalanxes! is not
This noble sight a joy for ever?
Behold their bedecked chests and forms --
The abode of divine valour.
Behold the gem ...
7. Soldiers of Tamil-land, Maravas
Whose eyes blaze with raging fire,
Cera warriors, stout-hearted Andras
And Tuluvas devoted to Mother's feet
8. Kannadas, Odyas and Maratas
Whose might will put to fright even Death
And righteous wrestlers of India
In form very like the supernal lords.
9. Rajput heroes whose fame will not fade
Till the end of the entire world
Or as long as martial prowess. lasts
Or as long as chaste women breathe
10. The natives of Punjab and those of great realms
Whence heroes from Arjun onward took birth,
They of Bengal who even when they slumber
Forget not their devotion to the feet of Mother:
11. These have gathered here to guard it; behold this!
May their strong-willed bravery thrive for ever!
May the banner of Mother-Bharat
By these adored, flourish in fame for ever!
- Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original formed part of Janma Bhumi -- 1909.
----------------
60. nitāṉakkaṭciyār kūṭṭam
cutēūyattip paḻittal
(nantaṉār carittirattalēyē cērip paṟiyākaḷellōrum oṉṟucērttu
nantaṉāriyum avaratu cuṭriyāriyum paḻikkaṉṟārkaḷ. cēriyilē
māṭṭiṟicci yuṇṭu pulivāḻvu vāḻntukoṇṭu āṇṭip pārppāṉukku
aṭimi ceyvatē corkkameṉ ṟaṟiyāmal, citamparap payittiyaṅ koṇṭu
aliyum nantaṉārālum, avaruṭiya cīṭarkaḷālum periya kēṭukaḷ
viḷiyakkūṭu meṉṟu varuttaṅ koṇṭu ap paṟiyarkaḷ **nām, eṉṉa ceyvōm,
puliyarē . intap pū.ciyilillāta putumiyik kaṇṭōm” eṉṟu yōcikkiṟārkaḷ.
antap pāṭṭiṉ karuttiyum varṇameṭṭiyun taḻulip piṉvarum pāṭal
eḻutappaṭ ṭirukkiṉṟatu. intap pāṭṭilē mēttā, kōkalē mutaliya nitāṉastarkaḷ
namatu tēcavimōcaṉa meṉṉuñ citamparatti eṇṇi āci koṇṭu paravaca
niliyi lirukkun ilaka muṉivacālum, avaratu kaṭciyārālum nāṭṭiṟkuk
keṭuti viḷiya meṉṟu pēcum viṣayaṅkaḷ amikkappaṭ ṭirukkiṟaṉa.)
irākam puṉṉāka varāsi - tāḷam rūpakam
pallavi
nāmeṉṉa ceyvōm, tuṇivarē- inta
pūmiyi lillāta putumiyik kaṇṭōm       ( nā) 1
caraṇaṅkaḷ
tilakaṉ oruvaṉālē ippaṭi yāccu
cemmiyum tīmiyumil lāmalē pōccu
palatici yuntuṣṭar kūṭṭaṅka ḷāccu
piyalkaḷ keñcil payameṉapanē pōccu       (nā) 2
tēcatti leṇṇaṟṟa pērkaḷuṅ keṭṭār
ceyyun toḻilmuṟi yāviyum viṭṭār
pēcavōr vārtti tātācolli viṭṭār
piṉvara vaṟiyāmal cutantiram toṭṭār.       (nā) 3
paṭṭampeṟ ṟōrkkumatip peṉpatu milli
paratēcap pēccil mayaṅkupava rilli
caṭṭa maṟantōrkkup pūjikuṟi villi
carkkāriṭañ collip pārttumpaya ṉilli.       (nā) 4
cīmit tuṇiyeṉṟā luḷḷaṅ kotikkiṟār
cīrilli yeṉṟālō eṭṭi mitikkiṟār
tāmetti yō“ vantē'' yeṉṟu tutikkiṟār
taramaṟṟa vārttikaḷ pēcik kutikkiṟār.       (nā) 5
------------
60. The Moderates Go Desperate (1909)
1. What can we do friends? This is a wonder
Hitherto unbeknown to this our world.
2. It is all becuse of 'Tilak,
Gone are good and bad, that is our luck.
The evil gangs are everywhere,
The fellows have lost fear and care.
3. Many of this nation are spoiled,
From work and duty have recoiled.
Words of Dadhabhi hold sway,
Freedom they clim; it is their doomsday.
4. The titled are not respected,
The aliens' words are suspected.
Idolized are now the lawless,
Plints to government are deemed useless.
5. At all foreign goods they flare up,
Dissent helps their wrath develop.
Something 'Vande' say they and are rapt;
Their speech and dance are in evil wrapt.
- Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original forms part of Janma Bhumi -- 1909.
-----------------
61. pārata tēviyiṉ aṭimi
(nantaṉ carittirattiluḷḷa "āṇṭik kaṭimik kāraṉallavē””* eṉṟa
pāṭṭiṉ varṇa meṭṭiyuṅ karuttiyum piṉpaṟṟi eḻutappaṭṭatu.)
pallavi
anniyartamak kaṭimi yallavē - nāṉ
anniyartamak kaṭimi yallavē.       1
caraṇaṅkaḷ
maṉṉiyapukaḻp pārata tēvi
taṉṉirutāḷiṇik kaṭimikkāraṉ.       (an) 2
ilakuperuṅkuṇam yāvikku melliyām
tilaka muṉikkotanta aṭimik kāraṉ.       (an) 3
veyyaciṟikkuḷḷē puṉṉaki yōṭupōm
ōyaṉpūpēntraṉuk kaṭimik kāraṉ.       ( an) 4
---------------
61. The Servitors of Bharata Devi
1. No slave to the aliens am I!
No slave to the aliens am 1!
2. A slave am I to the feet twain
Oh Bharat-Devi's gloried reign. 'No slave...
3. A slave am I to Tilak sint,
Apex of virtues and restrint. No slave ...
4. A slave am I of Lord Bhupendra
Who smiles in prison like Indra. No, slave ...
5. A slave am I to truthful Pal
Whom even Death cannot appal. No slave ...
6. Slave am I of Brahma Bhandava bold
Who even through fire did dharma uphold. No slave ...
- Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original forms part of Janma Bhumi -- 1909.
----------------
62. cutantirap paḷḷu
paḷḷar kaḷiyāṭṭam
rākam-varāḷi tāḷam-āti
pallavi
āṭuvōmē-paḷḷup pāṭu vōmē;
āṉanta cutantiram aṭintuviṭ ṭōmeṉṟu (āṭuvōmē)
caraṇaṅkaḷ
1.
pārppāṉi aiyareṉṟa kālamum pōccē-veṉḷip
paraṅkiyit turiyeṉṟa kālamum pōccē-picci
ēṟpārip paṇikiṉṟa kālamum pōccē-nammi
ēyppōruk kēvalceyyum kālamum pōccē (āṭuvōmē)
2.
eṅkum cutantiram eṉpatē pēccu-nām
ellōrum camameṉpatu uṟuti yāccu;
caṅkukoṇṭē veṟṟi ūtu vōmē-itit
taraṇikkel lāmeṭuttu ōtu vōmē (āṭuvōmē)
3.
ellōrum oṉṟeṉṉum kālam vantatē-poyyum
ēmāṟṟum tolikiṉṟa kālam vantatē-iṉi
nallōr periya reṉ ṉum kālam vantatē-keṭṭa
nayavañcak kārarukku nācam vantatē (āṭuvōmē)
4.
uḻavukkum toḻilukkum vantaṉi ceyvōm-vīṇil
uṇṭukaḷit tiruppōri nintaṉi ceyvōm.
viḻalukku nīrpāycci māya māṭṭōm-veṟum
vīṇarukku uḻittuṭalam ōya māṭṭōm (āṭuvōmē)
5.
nāmirukkum nāṭunamatu eṉpa taṟintōm-itu
namakkē urimiyām eṉpa taṟintōm-intap
pūmiyil evarkkum iṉi aṭimi ceyyōm-pari
pūraṇaṉuk kēyaṭimi ceytu vāḻvōm. (āṭuvōmē)
---------
62. Pallar-Dance (1909)
Chorus:
Come, that we may sing,
For Freedom's bliss is ours!
Come, that we may dance,
For Liberty is ours!
1. A Brahmin no more will be hiled
As "Lord, Lord," agin;
No more a white man in our land
As "Master" shall remin;
No more to those who would receive
Of such their alms, we bow,
Or bend to those who us deceive;
Never from now!
2. Hail Freedom! Freedom: everywhere
The word is trumpeted!
That we are brethren, equals born,
For certinty is sid.
Come, take the gleaming ivory shells
And breathe, "The strife is done!"
That earth may listen, and earth may know
That we have won!
3. O joy! the time is come when one
Is only as his neighbour;
The cheats of pomp and foppery
Are gone from us forever;
Who are the great? Only the good;
And these shall great remin;
The evil men in fall have shown
Their strength is vin!
4. The sweated labour and the plough
Of us shall honoured be;
Vain revellers a target stand
Unto our mockery;
Shall we the fat unwholesome weed
Labour to water and save?
Or waste, in serving greedy drones,
Our life-blood brave?
5. This land beneath our feet, we know,
Sure, is our very own;
Its proud possession could belong
To us and us alone;
Nor would we slave to any soul,
Come from the whole wide earth and hoar;
The Perfect only, we would serve
For evermore.
-- Prof. Hephzibah Jesudasan
Note: The Tamil original forms part of Janma Bhumi -- 1909.
----------------
63. aṉṉiyi vēṇṭutal / mahācaktikku viṇṇappam
vaḻamiyāṉatu
eṇṇiya muṭital vēṇṭum
nallavē yeṇṇal vēṇṭum
tiṇṉiya neñcam vēṇṭum
teḷintanal laṟivu vēṇṭum
paṇṇiya pāva mellām
paritimuṉ paṉiyē pōla
naṇṇiya niṉmu ṉiṅku
nacittiṭal vēṇṭu maṉṉāy.
-------------
63. Beseeching the Mother (February, 1910)
Thoughts and aims must come to pass:
And the mind shall think only good.
A stout and sturdy heart I seek,
And a clear, lucid intellect.
All the sins that I have done,
Like mist before the rising sun,
Should by thy Grace dissolved be,
Mother! as I stand before thee!
- Prof. K.G.Seshadri
Note: The Tamil original appeared in Karma-Yogi.
----------------
64. mahā cakti
cantira ṉoḷiyil avaḷik kaṇṭēṉ,
caraṇa meṉṟu pukuntu koṇṭēṉ;
intiri yaṅkaḷi veṉṟu viṭṭēṉ,
eṉateṉ āciyik koṉṟu viṭṭēṉ.
payaṉeṇ ṇāmal uḻikkac coṉṉāḷ,
pakti ceytu piḻikkac coṉṉāḷ;
tuyari lāteṉic ceytu viṭṭāḷ,
tuṉpa meṉpatik koytu viṭṭāḷ.
mīṉkaḷ ceyyum oḷiyic ceytāḷ;
vīci niṟkum vaḷiyic ceytāḷ;
vāṉka ṇuḷḷa veḷiyic ceytāḷ,
vāḻi neñciṟ kaḷiyic ceytāḷ.
------------
64. Maha Sakti (February, 1910)
1. Finding her glistening in the moonlight,
I took sudden refuge in her;
I have subdued the senses at last,
and demolished vin Desire.
2. She made the glitter of the Stars
The motion of the wind that blows
The vastness of the ethereal space,
And the joy in my heart-prise Be!
3. She sid: "Serve me and thrive,
and mind not the fruits of action."
she has chased all sorrows away
and wedded me to Joy.
- Dr. Prema Nandakumar
Note: The Tamil original appeared in Karma-Yogi.
The translation here published follows the version of Karma-Yogi.
-----------------
65 mahācaktikku viṇṇappam
mōkattik koṉṟuviṭu-allā leṉtaṉ
      mūcci niṟuttiviṭu;
tēkattic cāyttuviṭu-allā latil
      cintaṉi māyttuviṭu;
yōkat tiruttiviṭu-allā leṉtaṉ
      ūṉic citittuviṭu;
ēkat tiruntulakam-iṅkuḷḷaṉa
      yāviyum ceypavaḷē! 1
pantatti nīkkiviṭu-allā luyirp
      pārattip pōkkiviṭu;
cinti teḷivākku-allā litic
      cetta vuṭalākku;
intap patarkaḷiyē-nellāmeṉa
      eṇṇi iruppēṉō?
entap poruḷilumē-uḷḷē niṉṟu
      iyaṅki yiruppavaḷē. 2
uḷḷam kuḷirātō?-poyyāṇava
      ūṉam oḻiyātō?
kaḷḷam urukātō?-ammā!paktik
      kaṇṇīr perukātō?
veḷ ḷik karuṇiyilē innāy ciṟu
      vēṭki tavirātō?
viḷḷaṟ kariyavaḷē aṉittilum
      mēvi yiruppavaḷē! 3
----------------
65. Prayer To Mahasakti
1. Destroy all my delusion
Or else cease my breath;
Fell to the ground my frame
Or slay the thought within;
Set me firm in Yoga true,
Or mangle all my flesh:
O thou who madest all this world
From thy monadic state divine.
2. Bondage all remove,
Or away my burden of life;
Make clear my intellect,
Or make me a lifeless corse;
Shall these be deemed as grin,
That are but empty chaff?
O thou who movest all things
As Mahasakti immanent.
3. Won't ever my pretence melt, Mother
And tears flow, of devotion prire?
Won't my heart become pellucid
And my flawed ago false, perish?
Won't the flood of thy Grace slake
My currish hankerings for good?
Oh thou Ens Ineffable
That doth pervade everywhere!
- Prof. K.G.Seshadri
Note: The Tamil original appeared in Karma-Yogi. The translation here
given follows the version of Karma-Yogi.
----------------
66. pāratamātā
tiruppaṉḷi eḻucci
poḻutu pularntatu, yāñceyta tavattāl;
      puṉmi yiruṭkaṇam pōyiṉa yāvum|
eḻupacum poṟcuṭar eṅkaṇum paravi
      yeḻuntu viḷaṅkiya taṟiveṉum iravi)
toḻutuṉi vāḻtti vaṇaṅkutaṟ kiṅkūṉ
      toṇṭarpal lāyirar cūḻntu niṟkiṉṟōm.
viḻituyil kiṉṟaṉi piṉṉumeṅ tāyē,
      viyappitu kāṇ!paḷḷi meḻuntaru ḷāyē. 1
puḷḷiṉam ārttaṉa, ārttaṉa muracam,
      poṅkiṉa teṅkuñ cutantira nātam
veḷḷiya caṅka muḻaṅkiṉa kēḷāy;
      vītiye lāmaṇi kuṟṟaṉar mātar!
teḷḷiya antaṇar vētamum kiṉṟaṉ
      cīrttiru nāmamum ōti niṟ kiṉṟār.
aḷḷiya teḷḷamu taṉṉiye maṉṉi
      ārumi rēpaḷḷi yeḻuntaru ḷāyē 2
parutiyiṉ pēroḷi vāṉaḷiṭik kaṇṭōm;
      pārmici niṉṉoḷi kāṇutaṟ kalantōm;
karutiniṉ cēvaṭi yaṇivataṟ keṉṟē
      kaṉivuṟu neñcaka malarkoṭu vantōm;
curutikaḷ payantaṉi! cāttiraṅ kōṭi
      collaru māṇpiṉa! īṉṟaṉi yammē!
nirutarkaḷ naṭukkuṟac cūlkarat tēṟṟāy,
      nirmali yēpaḷḷi yeḻuntaru ḷāyē!
niṉṉeḻil viḻiyaruḷ kāṇpataṟ keṅkaḷ
      neñcakat tāvali nīyaṟi yāyō?
poṉṉaṉi yāyveṇ paṉimuṭi, yimiyap
      poruppiṉa ṉīnta peruntavap poruḷē!
eṉṉata vaṅkaḷcey tettaṉi kālam
      ēṅkuvam niṉṉaruṭ kēḻiyam yāmē?
iṉṉamum tuyiṟuti yēlitu naṉṟō?
      iṉṉuṅi rēppaḷḷi? yeḻuntaru erayē! 4
mataliya reḻuppavuk tāytumil vāyō?
      mānilam peṟṟava ḷiḵtuṇa rāyō?
kutalili moḻikkiraṅ kātoru tāyō?
      kōmaka ḷēperum pāratark karacē!
vitamuṟu niṉmoḻi patiṉeṭṭuṅ kūṟi
      vēṇṭiya vāṟuṉip pāṭutuṅ kāṇāy,
itamuṟa vantemi yāṇṭaruḷ ceyvāy
      īṉṟava ḷēppaḷḷi yeḻuntaruḷvāyē.
---------------
66. Morning Hymn to Mother India
1. The day hath dawned;
Our austerities have fructified;
The vile forces of darkness have melted into thin air;.
The golden beams of the morning sun illumine all over;
The sun of wisdom shines in all its splendour.
Thousands on thousands are we, your votaries,
Gathered to prise you and pay you homage.
Amazing it is that you are still asleep
Arise, Awake, Mother dear.
2. Birds boom, drums din;
The song of freedom fills the air.
Listen, o, Listen to the blast of the conches.
Women fill the streets;
Wise Brahmins recite the vedas
And chant thy holy name.
Soul of my soul, pure ambrosia,
Arise, Mother, awake.
3. We behold the sky bathed in sunlight;
We long to see thy eyes floodlight the earth.
Our own loving hearts in bloom
We offer on your lotus-red feet.
O Mother of the Vedas and the numerous sciences
Whose excellence defies description
O Mother pure, whose trident cused
The demons to tremble, Awake.
4. Dost thou not know our heartfelt longing
to behold thy grace-rining eyes?
Golden one, Offspring of the snow-crowned
Lord of the Himalayas
How long should we, poor souls, yearn,
And what penances perform, for thy grace?
Is it proper that thou shouldst still slumber?
My life sweet, awake.
5. No mother remins asleep when her children call her
Mother of a vast country, canst thou not realise this?
What kind of mother is she
Who doesn't respond to infant's lisps?
Queen, sovereign of great Bharat:
In all your eighteen languages
We salute and extol thee in several ways.
Arise! Awake! thou who gavest birth to us
Bless us with thy benign reign.
-Prof. S.Ramakrishnan
----------------
67. teḷivu
ellā mākik kalantuni ṟintapiṉ
      ēḻimi yuṇṭōṭā? - maṉamē!
pollāp puḻuvuṉik kolla niṉintapiṉ!
      putti mayakkamuṇṭō? i
uḷḷa telāmō rulireṉṟu kaṇṭapiṉ”
      uḷḷav kulivatuṇṭō? - maṉamē!
veḷḷa meṉappoḻi taṇṇaru eāḻntapiṉ
      vētaṉi payuṇṭōṭā? 2
citti ṉiyalpu mataṉperuñ cattiyiṉ?
      ceṅkiyuk tērntuviṭṭāl - maṉamē!
ettaṉi kōṭi yiṭarvantu cūḻiṉum
      eṇṇañ cinitumuṇṭō? 3
ceyka ceyalkaḷ civattiṭi niṉṟeṉat
      tēva ṉupittaṉaṉē - maṉamē
poy karutāma lataṉvaḻi niṟpavar
      pūtala mañcuvārō
374. āṉma voḷikkaṭal mūḻkit tiḷippavark
kaccamu muṇṭōṭā - maṉamē
tēṉmaṭi liṅku tiṟantatu kaṇṭatu
tēkkit tirivōmaṭā.
--------------
67. Unit Universalised (February, 1910)
1. When merged and become universalised
Can ever the unit persist? Oh Mind!
When it is resolved to liquidate you,
O Mind, -- wicked worm --, can buddhi falter?
2. When dawns the knowledge, that all that exist
Are but one life, can the heart ever flounder?
When one is immersed in the flooding grace,
Can pin dare hold its sway, thereafter, aye?
3. If peerless knowledge of pure consciousness
And its puissance great is come by,
Oh Mind! What though the onslught of countless troubles be,
Could they touch at all the thought of the freed?
4. "With your being firm established in Sivam
Perform your deeds". Thus spake the Deva Great.
Will they ever the world fear who travel
On the godly way from falsehood immune?
5. They swim and joy in the soul-sea of light;
Can fear near them, tell me Mind, you sirrah
Behold, the flood-gate of honey is flung open
We will dam it for our soul's irrigation.
-Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil griginal appeared in Karma-Yogi.
------------------
68. mahācaktikku viṇṇappam
eṇṇiya muṭital vēṇṭum
      nallavē eṇṇal vēṇṭum
tiṇṇiya neñcam vēṇṭum
      teḷinta nallaṟivu vēṇṭum
paṇṇiya pāva mellām
      paritimuṉ paṉiyē pōla
naṇṇiya niṉmuṉ iṅku
      nacittiṭal vēṇṭum aṉṉāy.
-- 1910 ām varuṭap patippu.
---------------
68. Petitioning Mahasakti
Clarity of intellect, firmness of heart,
An inwardly coursing flood of love,
Unique lordship over the senses,
Longing quest all the time after the way
Of Your grace and establishment
In Karma-Yoga: May you grant me these
O Supreme Ens that is without
Any mark or guna, but indeed is all.
-Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original appeared in Karma-Yogi.
This poem was later added to the autobiography in verse (Kanavu), by
Bharati.
---------------
69 cātāraṇa varuṣattut tūmakētu
tiṉiyiṉ mītu paṉiniṉ ṟāṅku
maṇicciṟu mīṉmici vaḷarvāl oḷitarak
ḻttici veḷḷiyik kēṇmikoṇ ṭilakum
tūma kētuc cuṭarē,vārāy!
eṇṇil pala kōṭi yōcaṉi yelli
eṇṇilā meṉmi iyaṉṟatōr vāyuvāl
puṉinta niṉṉeṭuvāl pōvateṉ kiṉṟār.
maṇṇakat tiṉiyum vālkoṭu tīṇṭi
ēḻiyark kētum iṭarceyā tēnī
pōti yeṉkiṉṟār;putumikaḷ āyiram
niṉikkuṟit taṟiñar nikaḻttukiṉ ṟaṉarāl.
pārata nāṭṭil paraviya emmaṉōr
nūṟkaṇam maṟantupaṉ ṉūṟāṇ ṭāyiṉa;
uṉatiyal aṉṉiyar urittaṭak kēṭṭē
terintaṉam;emmuḷē teḷintavar īṅkili.
vārāy,cuṭarē!vārtticila kēṭpēṉ;
tīyark kellām tīmikaḷ viḷittut
tolpuvi yataṉit tuyarkkaṭa lāḻttinī
pōvi yeṉkiṉṟār; poyyō,meyyō?
ātit talivi yāṇiyiṉ paṭinī
calittiṭun taṉmiyāl,taṇṭam nī ceyvatu
puviyiṉip puṉitamāp puṉitaṟ kēyeṉa
viḷampu kiṉṟaṉar atu meyyō,poyyō?
āṇṭōr eḻupat tintiṉil oru muṟi
maṇṇinī aṇukum vaḻakkiṉi yāyiṉum
immuṟi varaviṉāl eṇṇilāp putumikaḷ
viḷiyu meṉkiṉṟār;meyyō,poyyō?
cittikaḷ palavum,ciṟantiṭu ñāṉamum
mīṭṭum emmiṭiniṉ varaviṉāl viḷivatāp
pukalu kiṉṟaṉar; atu poyyō,meyyō?
-------------
69. The Comet (March, 1910).
1. Like a palm tree set on a millet plant,
With a growing til on a little star,
You blaze forth in kinship with eastern moon.
Oh lustrous comet! I bid you welcome.
2. You range over countless crores of yojnas;
They say your endless til is wrought of gas
The softness of which is indeed peerless.
3. They aver that your til touches the earth too
And you fare forth with no harm to the poor; .
The wise talk of your myriad marvels.
4. We that are over Bharath spread, have forgot
Long long ago the lore of works; we learnt
Of your nature true from aliens only;
None amongst us is with clarity blessed.
5. Come, Oh flame! I will put you some questions.
They say, you will cuse harm to the evil.
And will immerse in a sea of misery
The ancient world. Is this true or untrue?
6. "By Her mandate great -- the Primal Goddess,
You fare forth executing punishment
Purging the world of its impurities
And making it pure" they say. True or false?
7. "It is a rule with you to appear once
In a cycle of seventy five years;
This time you will cuse many marvels" say they.
I ask of you, if this be true or false.
- Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original appeared in Karma-Yogi.
----------------
70. kaṉavu
“poyyāyp paḻaṅkatiyāyk kaṉavāy
mellap pōṉatuvē.” -- paṭṭiṉattup piḷḷi
muṉṉuri
vāḻvu muṟṟum kaṉaveṉak kūṟiya
      maṟiva lōrtam uripiḻi yaṉṟukāṇ;
tāḻvu peṟṟa puvittalak kōlaṅkaḷ
      carata maṉṟeṉal yāṉum aṟikuvēṉ;
pāḻka ṭanta paranili yeṉṟavar
      pakarum annili pārttilaṉ pārmici;
ūḻ kaṭantu varuvatum oṉṟuṇṭō?
      uṇmi taṉṉilor pāti yuṇarntiṭṭēṉ. 1
māyi poyyeṉal muṟṟilum kaṇṭaṉaṉ;
      maṟṟum intap piramat tiyalpiṉi
āya nallaruḷ peṟṟilaṉ; taṉṉuṭi
      aṟivi ṉukkup pulappaṭa liṉṟiyē
tēya mīteva rōcoluñ colliṉic
      cemmi yeṉṟu maṉattiṭik koḷvatām
tīya pakti yiyaṟkiyum vāyntilēṉ;
      ciṟitu kālam poṟuttiṉuṅ kāṇpamē. 2
ulake lāmor peruṅkaṉa vaḵtuḷē
      uṇṭu ṟaṅki yiṭarceytu cettiṭum
kalaka māṉiṭap pūccikaḷ vāḻkkiyōr
      kaṉavilum iṅkaṉa vāku itaṉiṭi
cilati ṉaṅkaḷ uyirkkamu tākiyē
      ceppu taṟkari tākama yakkumāl
tilata vāṇuta lārtaru miyalān
      teyvi kakkaṉa vaṉṉatu vāḻkavē.       3
āṇṭōr pattiṉil āṭiyum ōṭiyum
      āṟu kuṭṭiyiṉ nīcciṉum pēcciṉumē
īṇṭu paṉmarat tēṟiyi ṟaṅkiyum
      eṉṉo ṭotta ciṟiyar irupparāl;
vēṇṭu tanti vitippiṉuk kañciyāṉ
      vīti yāṭṭaṅka ḷētiṉuṅ kūṭilēṉ,
tuṇṭu nūṟkaṇat tōṭu taṉiyaṉāyt
      tōḻamipiṟi tiṉṟi varuntiṉēṉ.       4
piḷḷik kātal
aṉṉa pōḻtiṉi luṟṟa kaṉaviṉi
      antamiḻccolil evvaṇṇamcollukēṉ?
coṉṉa tīṅkaṉa vaṅkut tuyiliṭit
      tōynta taṉṟu, naṉaviṭit tōyntatāl;
meṉṉa ṭikkaṉi yiṉcoṟ
      karuviḻi mēṉi yeṅkum naṟumalar vīciya
kaṉṉi yeṉṟuṟu teyvata moṉṟaṉik
      kaṇṭu kātal veṟiyiṟ kalantaṉaṉ.       5
‘oṉpa tāyapi rāyatta ḷeṉviḻik
      kōtu kātic cakuntali yottaṉaḷ’
eṉpa tārkkum viyappiṉi nalkumāl
      eṉcey kēṉ? paḻiyeṉ mici yuṇṭukol?
aṉpe ṉumperu veḷḷam iḻukkumēl
      ataṉi yāvar piḻittiṭa vallarē?
muṉpu māmuṉi vōrtami veṉṟavil
      muṉṉa rēḻik kuḻantiyeṉ ceyvaṉē?       6
vayatu muṟṟiya piṉṉuṟu kātalē
      mācu ṭittatu, teyvika maṉṟukāṇ;
iyalu puṉmi yuṭaliṉuk kiṉpeṉum
      eṇṇa muñciṟi tēṉṟatak kātalām;
nayami kuntaṉi māti māmaṇam
      naṇṇu pālar tamakkurit tāmaṉṟō?
kayalvi ḻicciṟu māṉiṉik kāṇanāṉ
      kāma ṉampukaḷ eṉṉuyir kaṇṭavē.       7
kaṉakaṉ mintaṉ kumara kuruparaṉ
      kaṉiyum ñāṉacam pantam turuvaṉmaṟ
ṟeṉiyar pālar kaṭavuḷar mītutām
      eṇṇil paktikoṇ ṭiṉṉuyir vāṭṭiṉōr
maṉati lēpiṟan tōṉmaṉa muṇṇuvōṉ
      mataṉa tēvaṉuk keṉṉuyir nalkiṉaṉ;
muṉamu rittavar vāṉpukaḻ peṟṟaṉar;
      mūṭa ṉēṉpeṟṟa tōtuvaṉ piṉṉarē.       8
nīre ṭuttu varutaṟ kavaḷ maṇi
      nitti lappuṉ ṉakicuṭar vīciṭap
pōre ṭuttu varumataṉ muṉcelap
      pōkum vēḷi yataṟkut tiṉantoṟum
vēre ṭuttuc cutantira naṟpayir
      vīntiṭac ceytal vēṇṭiya maṉṉartam
cīre ṭutta puliyiyaṟ cārarkaḷ
      tēca paktar varaviṉik kāttal pōl       9
kātti runtavaḷ pōmvaḻi muṟṟilum
      kaṇkaḷ piṉṉaḻa kārntu kaḷittiṭa
yātta tēruru ḷippaṭu mēḻitāṉ
      yāṇṭu tērcelu māṅkiḻup puṟṟeṉak
kōtta cintiyō ṭēki yatilmakiḻ
      koṇṭu nāṭkaḷ palakaḻit tiṭṭaṉaṉ;
pūtta jōti vataṉal tirumpumēm
      pulaṉa ḻintoru puttuyi reytuvēṉ.       10
pulaṅka ḷōṭu karaṇamum āviyum
      pōntu niṉṟa viruppuṭaṉ māṉiṭaṉ
nalaṅka ḷētu virumpuvaṉ aṅkavi
      naṇṇu ṟappeṟal tiṇṇama tāmeṉa
ilaṅku nūluṇar ñāṉiyar kūṟuvar;
      yāṉum maṟṟatu meyyeṉat tērntuḷēṉ;
vilaṅki yaṟki yiliyeṉil yāmelām
      virumpu maṭṭiṉil viṇṇuṟa lākumē.       11
cūḻu māya vulakiṉiṟ kāṇuṟun
      tōṟṟam yāviyum māṉata mākumāl;
āḻu neñcakat tāciyiṉ ṟuḷḷatēl,
      ataṉu ṭipporuḷ nāḷi viḷintiṭum
tāḻu muḷḷattar, cōrviṉar, āṭupōl
      tāvit tāvip palaporuḷ nāṭuvōr,
vīḻu mōriṭi yūṟṟiṉuk kañcuvōr,
      virumpum yāvum peṟārivar tāmaṉṟē.       12
vitiyi nōvar tam naṇparit tūṟṟuvar,
      vekuḷi poṅkip pakivari nintippar,
catikaḷ ceyvarpoyc cāttiram pēcuvar,
      cāta kaṅkaḷ puraṭṭuvar, poymicēr
matiyi ṉiṟpuli nāttikaṅ kūṟuvar,
      māynti ṭāta niṟinta viruppamē
katikaḷ yāvum tarumeṉa lōrntiṭār;
      kaṇṇi lātavar pōlat tikipparkāṇ       13
kaṉṉi mītuṟu kātaliṉ ēḻiyēṉ
      kavali yuṟṟaṉaṉ kōṭiyeṉ collukēṉ?
paṉṉi yāyiraṅ kūṟiṉum, paktiyiṉ
      pāṉmi naṉku pakarntiṭa lākumō?
muṉṉi vāṉkompiṟ ṟēṉuk kuḻaṉṟatōr
      muṭavaṉ kālkaḷ muḻumikoṇ ṭāleṉa
eṉṉi yaṉṟumaṟ ṟeṅṅaṉam vāyntatō
      eṉṉi ṭattavaḷ iṅkitam pūṇṭatē!       14
kātaleṉpatum ōrvayiṉ niṟkumēl
      kaṭaliṉ vanta kaṭuviṉi yokkumāl;
ēta miṉṟi yirupuṭit tāmeṉil,
      iṉṉamirtum iṇicola lākumō?
ōto ṇāta peruntavam kūṭiṉōr
      umpar vāḻviṉi yeḷḷiṭum vāḻviṉōr
māta rārmici tāmuṟuṅ kātali
      maṟṟa vartarap peṟṟiṭum māntarē!       15
moykkum mēkattiṉ vāṭiya māmati,
      mūṭu vempaṉik kīḻuṟu meṉmalar,
kikkum vēmpu kalantiṭu ceyyapāl,
      kāṭci yaṟṟa kaviṉuṟu nīḷviḻi,
poyk kiḷittu varuntiya meyyarō
      poṉṉa ṉāraruḷ pūṇṭila rāmeṉil
kikki ḷippeyar koṇṭa peruntuyark
      kāta laḵtu karutavun tīyatāl.       16
tēvar maṉṉaṉ miṭimiyip pāṭalpōl
      tīya kikkiḷi yāṉevaṉ pāṭutal?
āval koṇṭa arumpeṟaṟ kaṉṉitāṉ
      aṉpe ṉakkaṅ kaḷittiṭa lāyiṉaḷ;
pāvam tīmi paḻiyetun tērntiṭōm;
      paṇṭit tēva yukattu maṉitarpōl
kāval kaṭṭu vitivaḻak keṉṟiṭuṅ
      kayavar ceytika ḷētum aṟintilōm.       17
kāṉa kattil iraṇṭu paṟavikaḷ
      kāta luṟṟatu pōlavum āṅṅaṉē
vāṉa kattil iyakkariyakkiyar
      miyal koṇṭu mayaṅkutal pōlavum
ūṉa katta tuvaṭṭuṟum aṉputāṉ
      oṉṟu miṉṟi uyirkaḷil oṉṟiyē
tēṉa katta maṇimoḻi yāḷoṭu
      teyva nāṭkaḷ cilakaḻit tēṉarō.       18
āti rittiru nāḷoṉṟiṟ caṅkaraṉ
      ālayattoru maṇṭapan taṉṉilyāṉ
cōti māṉoṭu taṉṉan taṉiyaṉāyc
      coṟka ḷāṭi yiruppa, maṟṟāṅkavaḷ
pāti pēci maṟintupiṉ tōṉṟittaṉ
      paṅkayak kiyil mikoṇarntē, ‘oru
cēti! neṟṟiyil poṭṭuvip pēṉ’ eṉṟāḷ;
      tilata miṭṭaṉaḷ; ceyki yaḻintaṉaṉ.       19
eṉṉi yīṉṟeṉak kintu pirāyattil
      ēṅka viṭṭuviṇ ṇeytiya tāytaṉi
muṉṉi yīṉṟavaṉ, centamiḻc ceyyuḷāl
      mūṉṟu pōḻtuñ civaṉaṭi yēttuvōṉ,
aṉṉa vaṉtavap pūcaṉi tīrntapiṉ
      arucca ṉippaṭu tēmalar koṇṭuyāṉ
poṉṉi yeṉṉuyir taṉṉi yaṇukalum
      pūvi puṉṉaki naṉmalar pūppaḷ kāṇ.       20
āṅkilap payiṟci
nelliyūr ceṉṟav vūṇar kalittiṟaṉ
      nēru māṟeṉi enti paṇittaṉaṉ;
pulli yuṇkeṉa vāḷaric cēyiṉip
      pōkkal pōlavum, ūṉvili vāṇikam
nalla teṉṟoru pārppaṉap piḷḷiyi
      nāṭu vippatu pōlavum, entitāṉ
allal mikkatōr maṇpaṭu kalviyi
      āri yarkkiṅ karuvarup pāvati       21
nariyu yircciṟu cēvakar tātarkaḷ
      nāye ṉattiri yoṟṟar uṇaviṉip
perite ṉakkoṭu tammuyir viṟṟiṭum
      pēṭiyar piṟark kiccakam pēcuvōr
karutu mivvaki mākkaḷ payiṉṟiṭuṅ
      kalipa yilkeṉa eṉṉi viṭuttaṉaṉ.
arumi mikka mayilip pirintumiv
      aṟpar kalviyiṉ neñcu poruntumō?       22
kaṇitam paṉṉiraṇ ṭāṇṭu payilvarpiṉ
      kārkoḷ vāṉilōr mīṉili tērntilār;
aṇicey kāviyam āyiraṅ kaṟkiṉum
      āḻnti rukkum kaviyuḷam kāṇkilār;
vaṇika mumporuḷ nūlum pitaṟṟuvār;
      vāḻu nāṭṭiṟ poruḷkeṭal kēṭṭilār;
tuṇiyu māyirañ cāttira nāmaṅkaḷ
      collu vāreṭ ṭuṇippayaṉ kaṇṭilār.       23
kampa ṉeṉṟoru māṉiṭaṉ vāḻntatum,
      kāḷi tācaṉ kaviti puṉintatum,
umpar vāṉattuk kōḷiyum mīṉiyum
      ōrnta ḷantator pāskaraṉ māṭciyum,
nampa runtiṟa lōṭoru pāṇiṉi
      ñāla mītil ilakkaṇaṅ kaṇṭatum,
impar vāḻviṉ iṟutikaṇ ṭuṇmiyiṉ
      iyalpu ṇarttiya caṅkaraṉ ēṟṟamum,       24
cēraṉ tampi cilampi icittatum,
teyva vaḷḷuvaṉ vāṉmaṟi ceytatum,
pāril nallicip pāṇṭiya cōḻarkaḷ
pāra ḷittut tarmam vaḷarttatum,
pēra ruṭcuṭar vāḷkoṇ ṭacōkaṉār
piḻi paṭātu puvittalaṅ kāttatum,
vīrar vāḻtta milēccartan tīyakōl
vīḻtti veṉṟa civājiyiṉ veṟṟiyum,       25
aṉṉa yāvum aṟintilar pāratat
      tāṅki lampayil paḷḷiyuṭ pōkunar;
muṉṉa nāṭu tikaḻnta perumiyum
      mūṇṭi rukkumin nāḷiṉ ikaḻcciyum
piṉṉar nāṭuṟu peṟṟiyun tērkilār
      pēṭik kalvi payiṉṟuḻal pittarkaḷ;
eṉṉa kūṟimaṟ ṟeṅkaṉ uṇarttuvēṉ
      iṅki varkkeṉa tuḷḷam erivatē!       26
{[mu.pa.]: ‘mōrnta ḷantor pāṟkaraṉ māṭciyum’}
cūti lāta vuḷattiṉaṉ entitāṉ
      cūḻnte ṉakku nalañceyal nāṭiyē
ēti lartaruṅ kalvip paṭukuḻi
      ēṟi yuytaṟ kariya koṭumpilam
tīti yaṉṟa mayakkamum aiyamum
      ceyki yāviṉu mēyaci rattiyum
vātum poymiyum eṉṟa vilaṅkiṉam
      vāḻum veṅkukik keṉṉi vaḻaṅkiṉaṉ. 27
aiya reṉṟum turiyeṉṟum maṟṟeṉak
      kāṅki lakkali yeṉṟoṉ ṟuṇarttiya
poyya rukkitu kūṟuvaṉ, kēṭpīrēl:
      ‘poḻute lāmuṅkaḷ pāṭattil pōkkināṉ
meyya yarntu viḻikuḻi veytiṭa
      vīṟi ḻanteṉa tuḷḷanoy tākiṭa
aiyam viñcic cutantira nīṅkiyeṉ
      aṟivu vārit turumpeṉ ṟalintatāl.’       28
celavu tantikkō rāyirañ ceṉṟatu;
      tīte ṉakkuppal lāyirañ cērntaṉa;
nalamo reṭṭuṇi yuṅkaṇṭi lēṉiti
      nāṟpa tāyiraṅ kōyiliṟ colluvēṉ.
cilamuṉ ceynal viṉippaya ṉālum
      nan tēvi pāratat taṉṉi yaruḷiṉum
alivu ṟuttunum pēriruḷ vīḻntunāṉ
      aḻinti ṭātoru vāṟupi ḻittatē.       29
maṇam
niṉikka neñca murukum; piṟarkkiti
nikaḻtta nānaṉi kūcu mataṉṟiyē
eṉittiṅ keṇṇi varuntiyum ivviṭar
yāṅṅaṉ māṟṟuva teṉpatum ōrntilam
{[pāṭa pētam]: maṉṟeṉaku ‘kēṭpīrēl’
‘cila muṉ ceytaṉa nalviṉi yāṉunan’}
aṉittor ceytimaṟ ṟēteṉiṟ kūṟuvēṉ:
amma! mākkaḷ maṇameṉuñ ceytiyē.
viṉit toṭarkaḷil māṉuṭa vāḻkkiyuḷ
mēvu mimmaṇam pōṟpiṟi tiṉṟarō.       30
vīṭu ṟāvaṇam yāppati vīṭeṉpār;
      mikavi ḻinta poruḷip poruḷeṉpār;
nāṭuṅ kālor maṇamaṟṟa ceykiyi
      nalla tōrmaṇa māmeṉa nāṭṭuvār.
kūṭu māyiṟ pirama cariyaṅ koḷ;
      kūṭu kiṉṟila teṉṉiṟ piḻikaḷceytu
īṭa ḻintu narakavaḻic celvāy.
      yātu ceyyiṉum immaṇam ceyyalkāṇ.       31
vaciṭṭa rukkum irāmaṟkum piṉṉoru
      vaḷḷu varkkum muṉ vāyttiṭṭa mātarpōl
pacitto rāyiram āṇṭu tavañceytu
      pārkki ṉumpeṟal cāla varitukāṇ.
pucippa tumpariṉ nallamu teṉṟeṇip
      puliyar viṟṟiṭum kaḷḷuṇa lākumō?
acuttar colvatu kēṭkalir, kāḷiyīr!
      āṇmi vēṇṭiṉ maṇañceytal ōmpumiṉ.       32
vēṟu tēyat tevaretu ceyyiṉum
      vīḻcci peṟṟavip pārata nāṭṭiṉil
ūṟa ḻintu piṇameṉa vāḻumiv
      vūṉam nīkka virumpum iḷiyartām
kūṟu mentat tuyarkaḷ viḷiyiṉum
      kōṭi makkaḷ paḻivantu cūḻiṉum
nīṟu paṭṭavip pāḻcceyal maṭṭiṉum
      neñcattālum niṉippa toḻikavē.       33
pāla runtu mataliyar tammiyē
      pāta kakkoṭum pātakap pātakar
mūlat tōṭu kulaṅkeṭal nāṭiya
      mūṭa mūṭanir mūṭap puliyartām
kōla māka maṇattiṭik kūṭṭumik
      koliye ṉuñceya loṉṟiṉi yuḷḷavum
cāla viṉṉumō rāyira māṇṭivar
      tāta rāki yaḻikeṉat tōṉṟumē.       34
āṅkor kaṉṉiyip pattup pirāyattil
      āḻa neñciṭi yūṉṟi vaṇaṅkiṉaṉ;
īṅkor kaṉṉiyip paṉṉiraṇ ṭāṇṭaṉuḷ
      enti vantu maṇampuri vittaṉaṉ.
tīṅku maṟṟiti luṇṭeṉ ṟaṟintavaṉ
      ceya letirkkun tiṟaṉila ṉāyiṉēṉ.
ōṅku kātaṟ ṟaḻalev vaḷaveṉṟaṉ
      uḷamerittuḷa teṉpatuṅ kaṇṭilēṉ.       35
maṟṟor peṇṇi maṇañceyta pōḻtumuṉ
      māta rāḷiṭik koṇṭator kātaltāṉ
niṟṟal vēṇṭu meṉavuḷat teṇṇilēṉ;
      niṉivi yēyim maṇattiṟ celuttilēṉ;
muṟṟo ṭarpiṉi luṇmi yiruntatāl
      mūṇṭa piṉṉator kēḷiyeṉ ṟeṇṇiṉēṉi
kaṟṟuṅ kēṭṭu maṟivu mutirumuṉ
      kāta loṉṟu kaṭamiyoṉ ṟāyiṉa.       36
mataṉaṉ ceyyum mayakka moruvayiṉ;
      mākkaḷ ceyyum piṇippumaṟ ṟōrvayiṉ;
itaṉiṟ paṉṉiraṇ ṭāṭṭi yiḷiñaṉuk
      keṉṉi vēṇṭum iṭarkkuṟu cūḻccitāṉ?
etaṉi lēṉuṅ kaṭami viḷiyumēl
      ettu yarka ḷuḻaṉṟumaṟ ṟeṉceytuma
ataṉi luṇmiyō ṭārntiṭal cālumeṉṟu
      aṟam vitippatum appoḻu tōrntilēṉ.       37
cātti raṅkaḷ kiriyikaḷ pūcikaḷ
      cakuṉa mantiran tāli maṇiyelām
yātte ṉikkoli ceytaṉa rallatu
      yātu tarma muṟiyeṉal kāṭṭilar;
tītti ṟaṉkoḷ aṟivaṟṟa poycceyal
      ceytu maṟṟavi ñāṉa neṟiyeṉpar;
mūtta varveṟum vēṭattiṉ niṟkuṅkāl
      mūṭap piḷḷi aṟamevaṇaṇ ōrvatē?       38
tanti vaṟumi eytiṭal
īṅki taṟkiṭi yenti peruntuyar
      eyti niṉṟaṉaṉ, tīya vaṟumiyāṉ;
ōṅki niṉṟa peruñcelvam yāviyum
      ūṇar ceyta catiyil iḻantaṉaṉ:
pāṅki niṉṟu pukaḻccikaḷ pēciya
      paṇṭi naṇparkaḷ kinekiḻt tēkiṉar.
vāṅki yuynta kiḷiñarum tātarum
      vāḻvu tēyntapiṉ yātu matipparō?       39
pārppa ṉakkulaṅ keṭṭaḻi veytiya
      pāḻa ṭinta kaliyuka mātalāl
vērppa vērppap poruḷceyva toṉṟiyē
      mēṉmi koṇṭa toḻileṉak koṇṭaṉaṉ;
ārppu miñcap palapala vāṇikam
      āṟṟi mikka poruḷceytu vāḻntaṉaṉ;
nīrppa ṭuñciṟu puṟputa māmatu
      nīṅka vēyuḷaṅ kuṉṟit taḷarntaṉaṉ.       40
tīya māya vulakiṭi yoṉṟiṉil
      cinti ceytu viṭāyuṟuṅ kālati
vāya ṭaṅkameṉ mēlum parukiṉum
      māyat tākam tavirvatu kaṇṭilam;
nēya muṟṟatu vantu mikamika,
      nitta lummataṟ kāci vaḷarumāl.
kāya muḷḷa variyuṅ kiṭippiṉum
      kayavar māyvatu kāynta uḷaṅkoṇṭē.       41
ācik kōraḷa villi viṭayattuḷ
      āḻnta piṉṉaṅ kamiti yuṇṭāmeṉa
mōcam pōkalir’ eṉṟiṭit tōtiya
      mōṉi tāḷiṇi muppoḻu tēttuvām;
tēcattār pukaḻ nuṇṇaṟi vōṭutāṉ
      tiṇmi viñciya neñciṉa ṉāyiṉum
nācak kāciṉil āciyi nāṭṭiṉaṉ
      nallaṉ enti tuyarkkaṭal vīḻntaṉaṉ.       42
poruṭ perumi
poruḷi lārkkili yivvula keṉṟanam
      pulavar tammoḻi poymmoḻi yaṉṟukāṇ.
poruḷi lārkkiṉa milli, tuṇiyili,
      poḻu telāmiṭar veḷḷamvan teṟṟumāl.
poruḷilār poruḷ ceytal mutaṟkaṭaṉ.
      pōṟṟik kāciṉuk kēṅki yuyirviṭum
maruḷar tammici yēpaḻi kūṟuvaṉ:
      māmakaṭkiṅkor ūṉa murittilaṉ.       43
aṟamoṉ ṟētarum meyyiṉpam eṉṟanal
      laṟiñar tammi aṉutiṉam pōṟṟuvēṉ;
piṟavi rumpi ulakiṉil yāṉpaṭṭa
      pīḻi ettaṉi kōṭi! niṉikkavum
tiṟaṉa ḻinteṉ maṉamuṭi veytumāl.
      tēcat tuḷḷa iḷiñar aṟimiṉō!
aṟamoṉ ṟētarum meyyiṉpam; ātalāl
      aṟaṉi yētuṇi yeṉṟukoṇ ṭuytirāl.       44
veyya karmap payaṉkaḷiṉ nontutāṉ
      meyyu ṇarntiṭa lākumeṉ ṟākkiya
teyva mēyitu nīti yeṉiṉumniṉ
      tiruva ruṭkup poruntiya tākumō?
aiya kō ciṟi tuṇmi viḷaṅkumuṉ,
      āvi niyat tuyaruṟal vēṇṭumē!
piyap piyavōr āmikuṉ ṟēṟalpōl
      pāruḷōr uṇmi kaṇṭivaṇ uyvarāl.       45
tanti pōyiṉaṉ, pāḻmiṭi cūḻntatu;
      taraṇi mītiṉil añcaleṉ pārilar;
cinti yilteḷi villi; uṭaliṉil
      tiṟaṉu milli; uraṉuḷat tilliyāl;
mantar pāṟporuḷ pōkkip payiṉṟatām
      maṭamik kalviyāl maṇṇum payaṉili.
enta mārkkamum tōṟṟila teṉceykēṉ?
      ēṉpi ṟantaṉaṉ ittuyar nāṭṭilē?       46
muṭivuri
ulake lāmor peruṅkaṉa vaḵtuḷē
      uṇṭu ṟaṅki iṭarceytu cettiṭum
kalaka māṉiṭap pūccikaḷ vāḻkkiyōr
      kaṉavi ṉuṅkaṉavākum itaṟkunāṉ
palani ṉintu varuntiyiṅ keṉpayaṉ?
      paṇṭu pōṉati eṇṇiyeṉ ṉāvatu?
cilati ṉaṅka ḷiruntu maṟivatiṟ
      cinti ceytevaṉ cettiṭu vāṉaṭā!       47
ñāṉa muntuṟa vumpeṟṟi lātavar
      nāṉi lattut tuyaraṉṟik kāṇkilar
pōṉa taṟku varuntilaṉ. meyttavap
      pulami yōṉatu vāṉat toḷirumōr
mīṉi nāṭi vaḷittiṭat tūṇṭili
      vīca lokku meṉali maṟakkilēṉ.
āṉa tāva taṉittiyuñ ceytatōr
      aṉṉi yē! iṉi yēṉum aruḷviyāl.       48
vēṟu
aṟivilē teḷivu, neñcilē uṟuti,
      akattilē aṉpiṉōr veḷḷam,
poṟika ḷiṉmītu taṉiyara cāṇi,
      poḻutelām niṉatupē raruḷiṉ
neṟiyilē nāṭṭam, karuma yōkattil
      nilittiṭal eṉṟivi yaruḷāy,
kuṟikuṇa mētum illatāy aṉittāyk
      kulaviṭu taṉipparam poruḷē!       49
{[pāṭa pētam]: ‘ceyvatōr’}
--------------
70. A Dream (1910)
"Like untruth, story old and dream
Away did it all slowly stream."
- St. Pattinatthar.
1. The dictum of them well-versed in Vedas
That all life is a dream, is no error;
The base earthly pomp, I know well myself,
Is impermanent; I have not on earth Beheld
"The Supreme State beyond the Void"
As they call it; is there aught that can balk fate?
I have but sensed a part only of truth.
2. I have realised the total falsity
Of Maya; but alas! I do lack grace
To con and scan the nature of Brahman;
Nor can I by dint of mere devotion
Hold as good, words of some one, which are not
By my own intellect comprehended;
Let me therefore wait and abide my time,
3. All the world is a huge dream and in that
The life of those mischievous human insects
That merely eat, sleep, cuse harm and perish
Is a dream within a dream; in this life
The love of midens with tilak dazzling
Surely is ambrosia for a few days
Which bewitches beings ineffabiy;
Well, may that divine dream of love flourish!
4. When I was ten years old, boys of my age
Would all climb up and down many a tree,
Would swim in river and pond, run and play
In frolic gay, and jibber and jabber.
Afrid of my father's strict injunction
I would desist from gambols in the street.
Alone in my library I languished
Without company or camaraderie.
5. Can I even in my Tamil dulcet
Describe the visitant-dream of that time?
This sweet dream was not slumber-bred; it was
A waking dream; I beheld a virgin
Of fair git, sweet of speech with jet-black eyes
And a frame that breathed the fragrance of flowers;
With this goddess I fell madly in love.
6. She was nine spring times old; to me she was
Epical Sakuntala! Others may
Wonder at this; what could I do? Am I
To be blamed? If the flood of love should draw
Could any escape it? Before the bow
Of Manmath which has many a great sint
With ease vanquished, what am I, a mere child!
7. The love that springs past boyhood is in truth
Frught with blemish; it is aught but divine;
Tainted is that love by the thought, that joy
Is meant for the body base to thrill.
As of right are the boys in love to wed
The charming girls of their choice entitled.
When my looks fell on her -- the carp-eyed roe --,
The barbs of Manmath, my life seared away.
8. Kanaka's son, Kumaragurupara,
Mellow Gnanasambhanda and Duruva
Were like me, little boys; these were to God
Devoted, and lived chastened lives.
To Manmath -- Mind-born and Nibbler of Mind --,
I made a total gift of my dear life;
Theirs was divine glory; what 1 -- the fool --,
Came by, I shall relate some other time.
9. To fetch a pitcher of water she would
Fare forth with a face bright with pearly smile;
Before her would march Manmath every day
In battle-array; like the base evil spies
Who at the hest of petty kings that plot
To pluck root and branch the goodliest plant
Of Liberty, lie in vile ambuscade
To surprise the noble patriots true
10. I would wait with joyous eyes and watch her
From behind, tripping all along the way.
That which is attached to the wheel of a car
Moves with the car; even so was poor me.
Drawn by her I triled after in sheer joy;
Thus did I spend my days a good many.
If her flower-face lustrous turned on me
I would revive, though of all senses reft.
11. "The spirit is with senses and organs
Linked; in this concatenation, man wields
His will to come by weal and is crowned with
Fruition sure". Thus say they who in sciences
Are well-versed; I too know this to be true.
If we are freed from animal-nature
Heaven itself is ours for mere wishing.
12. In this mayic world phenomenal,
Whatever is beheld is wrought of Mind.
If to-day in the heart, deep desire lurks,
On the morrow its outcome is yielded.
They of drooping heart, victims of fatigue,
They that goat-like, leap on things variform
And quail before besetting difficulty
Can never obtin their desired objects.
13. Fate would they blame, and their dear friends defame,
Hurl on foes obloquy in soaring wrath,
Hatch stratagems, cite pseudo-scriptures false,
Study and scan horoscopes and air out
Base atheism bred by mind falsified.
"Desire -- total and deathless --, alone could
Confer on man fruition." This they know not.
All perplexed they would be like the eyeless.
14. Billions were the worries which besieged me
As my heart of love was on the virgin set.
Many myriad words may be uttered;
Yet devotion is truly ineffable.
Like a lame man struggling for the honey-comb
On a lofty branch, with feet sudden blest,
I know not how at all it came to be.
She did in love link her heart with mine.
15. Unilateral love, be it kno
Like the venom churned out of the ocean;
If love blameless is indeed mutual
Can even ambrosia ever match it?
Even they with ineffable tapas blest
And who spurn the life of the heavenly
Shall into recipients of love turn
From mids with whom they are in love entwined.
16. Like the moon enveloped by thronging clouds,
Like flower soft, shrouded by cruel frost,
Like the sweet milk by neem embittered,
Like long eyes that are deprived of their light,
Like truth assiled and wasted by falsehood,
Are they from love of golden girls witheld
And burnt and consumed by one-sided love
Which even to think on spells perdition.
17. Can the King of Devas sing of indigence?
Can I, of raw unilateral love?
That rare virgin, my beloved darling
Began to pour on me limitless love.
Like them of the ancient Deva-Yuga
We knew not aught of evils wrought by the base,
Such as watch or restrint, rule or custom.
18. Like two sylvan birds in love, like a pir
Of celestial Yakshas by love bewitched,
With none of cloying physical love to mar,
Our spirits mixed and merged with each other.
Thus I spent a few divine days with her,
My Honey whose lips rined words of rubies.
19. On the divine Atiri-day I was
Alone with her, the bright-eyed antelope
In the mandapam of Sankara's Temple
Engaged in a confabulation sweet.
On a sudden she vanished and came back
With collyrium in the palm of her hand.
"On your forehead I shall fix a tilak" .
She sid and so she did. Undone was I!
20. She that gave birth to me left me forlorn
And entered the heaven when I was but five.
Her father would Siva's feet, thrice a day
Hail with hymn and sacred song of Tamil sweet.
After his worship, I would come to her,
My golden life, with holy blooms honied
Offered in the sacred adoration;
She would joyously smile like a sweet bloom.
21. My father bade me leave for Nelli town
There to learn the arts of the barbaric.
Like sending a lion-cub to eat grass,
Like apprenticing a Brahmin-boy under
A butcher, my father bade me take to
Un-Aryan, limicolous instruction.
22. Coveted by petty servants foxy,
Slaves, spies who roam like pariah-dogs, eunuchs
Who sell themselves for a mess of pottage,
Sycophants and men base as these swindlers.
Parted from my bird of Paradise, would
My mind be drawn by such education?
23. They cultivate Arithmetic for twelve.
Whole years, but cannot tell the stars of the sky;
A thousand wondrous epics they study,
But know not the poetic Muse profound;
Commerce and Economics they blabber,
But are blind to the nation's poverty;
The names of all sastras, they know by rote,
Yet are not the slightest benefited.
24. Throve Kamban, a true man; the lofty rhymne
Did Kalidasa build, Bhaskara great
With mere eyes scaled the heavens and measured
Sidereal hosts and orbs innumerable;
With miraculous skill Panini wrote
His erudite grammatical thesis;
To the depths of life phenomenal, dived: S
ankara and declared Truth's nature true.
25. On Cilambu sang the younger brother
Of the Chera; divine Valluvar composed
Heavenly scriptures; glorious Pandyas
And Cholas gave gifts of land and upheld
Dharma; with the sword of grace, Asoka
Wielded his flawless sceptre; Shivaji
Hailed by the valorous, extirpated
The barbaric and alien tyranny.
26. All these they learn not -- they that in India
Enter schools of English education.
'The ancient glory that is India's past.
The ignominy that is its present,
And the state by her to be reached' -- to them
Is unknown: Mad learners of eunuch-instruction!
Oh, what am I to say and how learn them!
My soul is all cinders becuse of these,
27. Wanting to do me good, my good father
Whose heart was guileless, did assign poor me
To the deep pit of alien education,
The cruel black chasm insurmountable,
The horrendous cavern of the fierce beasts
Oí evil delusion, doubt, apathy,
Rancorous wrangling and falsity foul.
28. To the fibsters called 'Iyer' and 'Dori'
That tught what was climed to be the art
Of English, I would this proclim, listen:
"As I spent all my time on your lessons
I became fatigued; sunken were my eyes;
Verve I forfeited; my heart grew timid;
Excessive doubt held me in its power;
Gone was my dear freedom, and my reason
Was tossed like a sliver in an ocean.
29. This would I swear in thousands of temples:
'It cost my father a thousand, and what
I came by were evils many thousands;
Well-being, not a whit, was my portion.'
As a result of my former good deeds
And by the grace of our Bharat-Devi
Despite my fall into your mighty murk
I was somehow saved from dire destruction.
30. If thought upon, mind would melt; in extreme shyness
My tongue would pin me to divulge this.
Howsoever I grieve, I do not know
How this misery could be averted!
I would now relate what it was, alas:
Is there aught to parallel the event
Known as marriage, in this, the human life
Which is full fettered by the karmic chin?
31. They call it 'house' which mars the 'House of Bliss';
They call it larta' which is 'anarta';
They do call it fragrant matrimony
Which is unaromatic acrimony;
If it be not possible, better sin,
Lose virtue and be bound for perdition;
Do whatever you like save this marriage.
32. Even if one should willingly perform
Tapas for a thousand years, rarely -- yes --,
Very rarely is one to be endowed
With a woman like unto the spouses
Of Vasishta, Rama and Valluvar.
Deeming it to be nectar, will ever
One imbibe toddy sold by an outcast?
Listen not to the impure, oh my lads!
Hold fast to manliness and spurn marriage.
33. Whatever be the doings of the men
Of other nations, in fallen Bharat
O youths who are out to quell the blemish
Of sapless existence cadaverous!
Though you should suffer endless miseries
And you be sneered at by a billion men,
Yet, never, never shall you entertin
Even a thought about this blasted deed.
34. When the mind dwells on the deed which is nought
But murder though called beauteous marriage,
Wrought on infants who are but barely weaned,
By the evil, the most cruelly evil --
The nescient, the most ignorantly base --
Men that quell family, root and branch, --
It is apt to curse them to a mean life
Of base slavery for a thousand years
And ultimately annihilation.
35. As a boy of ten, I, deep in my heart
Enshrined a virgin; now in my twelfth year
My father married me to another.
I knew this to be a crime, yet had not
The strength to oppose it; nor did I know
Aught of the singeing my heart had suffered
By the spiralling flame of lofty love.
36. When I did marry a different girl
I thought not that my former love should cease;
I now turned all my thought on this marriage;
As there was truly some ancient nexus
I but thought my wedding to be a game;
Before buddhi could mature by learning
Love one thing was, Duty yet another.
37. Between the enchantment by Manmath cast
And the bondage by the mad people wrought,
I, a boy of twelve lacked not troubles, alas
I knew not of Dharmic law that says:
"What though the plight be, if duty springs thence,
Despite worries, one could toil and do all
And be with truth (thus discovered) attuned."
38. They but fettered me with sastras, kriyas,
Pooja, omens, mantras, tali and bell
And did not unto me reveal the course .
And form of Dharma; they would forge brinless deeds
Of falsity, full-frught with puissance dire
And call it the righteous path; should elders
Cling to mere form alone, how could a boy --
Lean-witted --, even come to know of Dharma?
39. In the meantime, father was beset by
Great grief, by chill penury; all his wealth --
Great indeed it was --, he lost by the ruse
Enacted by the barbarous aliens.
Those flattering friends who earlier flocked to him
Showed him their back and did vanish away.
Would his kin and servants by him pampered
Henceforth esteem him, after his downfall?
40. In this blasted Kali-Yuga, when the race
Of Brahmins festers and decays, he thought
That to amass wealth by sweat and more sweat,
Was the only good worth doing; he did
Many a transaction and acquired wealth;
But when it burst like a bubble of water
His heart sank and he became a bag of bones.
41. If in this evil and illusive world
Mind chooses to pursue a thing through thirst
Though mouthfuls are drunk agin and agin,
The illusive thirst is never quenched at all;
Daily advent of things favourable
Feeds on and on for ever the desire.
Though till death do flow things coveted
The base die, their hearts, sere and dry, alas!
42. "Limit there is none for desire; be not
Deceived that peace can be attined after
Enjoyment of things" thundered the Silent One.
Let us hil his feet thrice a day. Subtle
And sharp was intellect, much prised by
His country-men; stout was his heart also;
But he, my father, was by money lured;
The good man ended in a sea of troubles.
43. "This world is not for them devoid of wealth":
These words of the bard are not untrue at all.
They that lack wealth have no race and no help;
Hourly do they suffer by flooding worries;
The prime duty of the destitute is
To earn; I only blame the deluded
Who perish by morbid cupidity;
Blameless is Sri -- Mabalakshmi -- prise be!
44. I will dily hil the wise men who sid:
"Dharma alone confers happiness true"
How many billions are the miseries
I was put to, coveting other things;
The very thought quells my power and breaks
My heart; oh youths of this nation! learn this:
"Dharma alone confers happiness true."
To Dharma hold fast and you will be saved.
45. "Truth can be realised only after
Getting chastened by cruel karma hard:
Thus has Thou, Oh God, decreed!
This indeed Is just; yet does this with thy grace agree?!!
Alas, before even a tithe of truth can
Be known, one has mortally to suffer!
Like a tortoise ascending slow a hill :
Men of earth have to acquire saving truth.
46. Gone was father; withering indigence
Came in the wake; refuge none could I have
In the world; my mind lost all clarity
And body, capacity; all-idiotic
Learning gined by waste of money on dullards
Was muck and mud and aviled not.
Why, why Was I born in this miserable land?
47. All the world is a huge dream and in that
The life of those mischievous human insects
That merely eat, sleep, cuse harm and perish
Is a dream within a dream and for this
Why ponder deeply and wallow in pin?
Of what avil is the past--dead and gone?
Who will like to give up his ghost thinking
On this ephemeral and flitting life?
48. Those who are not with wisdom pre-blessed
Shall in this world have nought but misery.
I grieve not for the past; I forget not
That it will be like casting the fishing-rod
To hook the pole-star -- Duruva --, symbol
Of wisdom true; O Mother! The Author
Of all past, present as well as future:
May you at least hereafter grant me grace.
49. Clarity of intellect, firmness of heart,
An inwardly coursing flood of love,
Unique lordship over the senses,
Longing quest all the time after the way
Of thy grace and establishment
In Karma-yoga: May Thou grant me these
O supreme Ens that is without
Any mark or guna, but indeed is all!
Note: This poem under the title Kanavu, was published in the form of a
booklet at Pondicherry by Bharati. This work was banned by the British
Government. Bharati mintined a diary which he called "My Journal of
Thoughts and Deeds". It contins, inter alia, the following observation.
Kanavu -- The Government has got to be made to amend its order of
proscription -- The songs attached to the Kanavu book.
In his letter to Ramsay Macdonald published by The Hindu on 10-2-1914,
Bharati observes as follows:
"During the trial of the Ashe murder case at the Madras High Court, I
could get some glimpses into the sort of "evidence" which made the
police suspect me as a possible abettor.
"It would appear that some of the so-called "conspirators" -- the charge
of any conspiracy of murder Mr.Ashe, be it noted, broke down in the
course of the trial and was abandoned by the Government -- had with them
copies of a harmless love poem and a social reform novelette written by
me ..."
- Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
The love poem above referred to iş "Kanavu" and the novelette "Aril Oru
Panku".
---------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file was last updated on 8 Dec 2023..
Feel free to send the corrections to the webmaster (pmaduri AT
gmil.com)
