[pm logo]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

"Bharati Patalkal" - English Translation, part 1 (songs 1-50), edited by T.N. Ramachandran  pāratiyār pāṭalkaḷ - āṅkila moḻipeyarppu ti. nā. irāmacantiraṉ (tokuppu), pākam 1 (pāṭalkaḷ 1-50) In unicode/utf-8 format

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Acknowledgements:
Our Sincere thanks go to Tamil Virtual Academy for providing a scanned
PDF of this work.
This e-text has been prepared using Google OCR online tool and
subsequent proof-reading of the output file.
Preparation of HTML and PDF versions: Dr. K. Kalyanasundaram, Lausanne,
Switzerland.
© Project Madurai, 1998-2023.
Project Madurai is an open, voluntary, worldwide initiative devoted to
preparation
of electronic texts of tamil literary works and to distribute them free
on the Internet.
Details of Project Madurai are available at the website
https://www.projectmadurai.org/
You are welcome to freely distribute this file, provided this header
page is kept intact.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

BHARATI PATALKAL - English Translation edited by T.N. Ramachandran

Source:
BHARATI PATALKAL
Edited by Sekkizhar Adi-p-Podi T.N. RAMACHANDRAN
TAMIL UNIVERSITY, THANJAVUR Tamil Nadu - India
ISBN: 81-7090-137-5
Tamil University Publication No. : 117
Thiruvalluvar Year 2020; Purattasi - October 1989
Title : Bharati Patalkal :
Editor T. N. Ramachandran
Price : Rs. 100-00
Edition : First - 1989
Press : Tamil University (Offset) Press, Thanjavur - 613 001.
------------
"tarātalattup pāṣaikaḷil, aṇṇal tanta
tamiḻp pāṭṭai moḻi peyarttāl teriyum cēti!"
- pāratitācaṉ
------------

CONTENTS

Foreword
Preface
List of Translators
List of Poems

  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------
  1. An Epistle to the Rajah of       26. Enkal Nadu
  Ettaiyapuram                        

  2. On Gandhimatinathan              27. Lajapathy

  3. Ilacai Eleven                    28. On Bhupendra

  4. A Sonnet on Solitude             29. Lajapthy's Lament

  5. In Praise of Varuna Chintamani   30. An English Official Addresses
                                      an Indian Citizen
                                      Bent Upon Freedom

  6. On Dadhabhai Naoroji             31. On Maya

  7. In Praise of Bengal              32. Arya-Darshan -- A Dream

  8. Song of the Nation               33. Liberty

  9. From: A Psalm of Life            34. Mehta to Tilak

  10. Welcome to the Prince of Wales  35. Mazzini's Vow

  11. On Dr. U.V.Swaminatha Iyer      36. An Englishman to an Indian
                                      Patriot

  12. Vande Mataram, the Mantra       37. The Reply of the Indian Patriot
                                      to the Englishman

  13. India's Past                    38. Thirst for Freedom

  14. The Past Glory and the Present  39. Aryan Traits
  Debasement of My Motherland         

  15. To Abhedananda                  40. Dasanka of Bharata Devi

  16. I                               41. Our Mother

  17. Lines on the Moon               42. Freedom

  18. On Ravi Varma                   43. Victory to Mother

  19. Chatrapati Shivaji's Address to 44. Freedom Plant
  His Warriors                        

  20. On Sri Subbarama Dikshitar --   45. On Tilak Maharaj
  An Eulogy                           

  21. Vande Mataram -- Hail:          46. Gokhale Swamy's Song

  22. May Tamil Flourish For Ever     47. Welcome Muse, the Beloved

  23. Vande Mataram                   48. Guru Gobind Singh

  24. Pseudo-Patriots                 49. The Dread Thunderbolt

  25. Adoration of the Country        50. The Song of the Nation
  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------

------------------

FOREWORD

Bharati is probably one of the best poets of modern period in our coun
try and definitely the greatest of Tamil poets of our time and the
Tamils can legitimately be proud of this great bard who has given not
only a new direction and dimension but a new shape and a new thrust to
Tamil poetry as well, it is in his magic hand Tamil Poetry regained its
vigour and vitality, clarity and naturalness. It is true that Tamil
Poetry has an uninterrupted tradition of more than twenty centuries and
yet we find that there was a lull after great Kamban of i2th century! We
find a long period of poetic sterility and it is Bharati who has
appeared in the poetic scenario in the year 1882 and has changed the
whole poctic world into a lively one) With the birth of Bharati a new
literary epoch was born, a new trend has begun and a new style was found
and above all a new generation of Tamil poets has come into existence.
Even after several years of his death, Bharati is still considered to be
living with us, speaking and singing to us.) Every day we hear him and
we listen to him and we follow him, we appreciate him and above all we
adore him. He has become immortal and he is affec tionately called
Amarakavi, an immortal poet.)
Bharati was a great patriot. He loved his language, literature, culture
and tradition. His love and affection for his country is well known. His
concern for the poor and the downtrodden was very great. His interest in
the welfare of common man was unsurpassed. His appreciation and ado
ration for the ancients is unmatchable. (His faith and confidence in the
future generation is unquestioned. Women's emancipation was very near to
his heart. Children's welfare, their good upbringing their development
etc., were always in his mind. Human values and their role in the mental
make up of young children and the old alike were in this thought. Above
all freedom, freedom to India was supreme in his mind.
Freedom is the birth right of humanity. No one is born as slave. Free
dom is divine and slavery is man made. Freedom is sublime and slavery is
inhuman. Freedom is everything. It is in our blood and in our heart and
in the human instinct.
The very thought of freedom to India makes him happy, hilarious and
forgetful. It makes him sing and dance. Freedom to India and it alone
would guarantee to everything good. Bharati forgets everything and in
his hilarious mood he sings:
Freedom! Freedom: Freedom!
Freedom to Tiyars
To the Parayas, to the Pulayas
To the Kuravas and to the Maravas
... ...... ..... ...
... ...... ..... ...
No poverty no slavery
No caste no creed
No difference no distinction
Equality! Equality! Equality!
Men and women
No difference, no distinction
No insult No bossing over
Let us burn the evil of the ignorance
Bharati was a poet of patriotism and freedom and it is doubtless to say
that he sang his songs for the common man and he always wanted to be
direct and simple in his poetry. The supreme aim of this great poet was
to penetrate into the hearts of simple folks and to instill passionate
love for freedom in their hearts and prepare them to make any kind of
sacrifice to achieve the supreme goal viz., Free India and he is rightly
called Makkal Kavignar (Poet of the masses).
It is well known that Tamil language is not only one of the very few
languages of the world of great antiquity but also its uninterrupted
literary history for more than 20 centuries is almost unparalleled in
the literary tradi tion of the world. The immortal Sangam Poetry,
Ettuttokai (eight anthology) and Pattuppattu (ten idylls) is a master
piece of literature. They are secular in nature and they reflect the
exalted life of Tamils.
Following Sangam Classics there arose twin epics, Cilappatikaram and
Manimekalai, which are in turn followed by what is known as Bhakthi
litera ture. The great trio, Navukkarasar (the king of words and songs),
the great Sampantar (who is known for his melodious hymns), jubilant
Sundarar and Manickavasagar of great Thiruvacagam are all glories of
Tamil poetry, giving new path and new strength to it. By nothing is
Tamilnadu so glorious as by her poetry.
The appearance of great Kamban in the literary scenario of Tamilnadu has
been a great boon to the literary world. It is the incomparable charm of
Kamban's power of poetic style not to speak of his poetic truth and
beauty which gives immortality and permanence to the great epic Kamba
ramayanam which is considered to be one of the greatest epics in the
world.
Knowing fully well the literary history of world languages Bharati is
rightly proud of the unbroken tradition of Tamil and the splendid lumina
ries of the Tamil poetical heaven. The great antiquity of the poetic
tradi tion, the richness and the brilliance of it, the excellence of
Sangam poetry the literary grandeur of Cilappatikaram, the magnificent
treatment of religious tenets in Manimekalai, the spontaneous
outpourings of Bhakthi movement through great saints of Saivaism and
Vaishnavism the great master piece endowed by the great master mind
Kamban etc., throng into his mind and heart.
Bharati is not a man who is satisfied with past achievements alone. He
is a product of a new order and a new generation and a man of new mental
make up. He is a man of vigour and vitality, imagination and inno
vation. It is true that we have great antiquity and inner strength; we
have survived many upheavals and onslaughts and still we grow strong.
There were hundreds of languages which were once very dynamic, lovely
and strong. But alas! they are all gone.
But Tamil is still alive, alive among people. It is a living language,
young energetic and ever growing in its own way. For a poet like Bharati
this is not enough. He knew that a new explosion of knowledge was around
the corner. Many new frontiers were there. New vistas were there. Tamils
and their language should be prepared to meet the new challenges in the
fast growing world, he thought.
It is true that Bharati was a Tamil and sang his songs in Tamil, But his
vision and spirit have not confined to Tamil and Tamilnadu alone and
they have transcended linguistic and geographical boundaries.
Freedom and patriotism pristine purity of children and the passionate
patriotic fervour of the grown ups, the great cultural heritage of the
coun try, the courage and chastity of Indian women, the National and
cultural integration, the regional and the local diversities of India,
the great Ganga and Cauveri, the lovely Kashmir and Kanyakumari, the
young damsels of Kerala and the great intellectuals of Kasi etc., were
in the minds of this great master mind.
Bharati is one of the penetrating poets of this century and he reaches
and touches the inner hearts of his readers and creates poetic ecstacy
in their minds. His poetic excellence is so effective and so eloquent
that the readers fall under the spell of this great bard.
Bharati is not only known for his choicest diction but also for
effective ly making use of this in quick succession. The choicest
dictions of Bharati in the choicest combinations make it possible to
create intended imagery of high order.
The musical diction and moving words that he makes use of the liquid and
limpid phrases that are at his beck and call the effective and eloquent
sentences that are formed and above all the spontaneous outflow of
poetic truth and beauty that we find in him are really marvellous and
they make this great master mind "poet among .poets" and "bard among
bards".
In translating Bharati's poerns into English, the Tamil University has
fulfilled one of the dreams of Bharati -- the exchange of his own ideals
with the rest of the world.
The Tamil University nas recently launched an ambitious project, Trans
lation Of Tamil Classics Into English and I am very happy to say that
within a short span of time several works have been taken up.
Classics like,
1. Cilappatikaram
2. Manimekalai
3. Bharatiyar Songs
4. Tirukkovaiyar
have been completed and the following are in progress :
5. Akananuru
6. Purananuru
7. Periyapuranam
8. Kalitrokai
I am sure that these translations will be of great use to understand the
poetic tradition of Indian Literature in general and Tamil Literature in
particular.
12-10-'89,       Dr. S. Agesthialingom,
Thanjavur.       Vice-Chancellor.
-------------
Mahakavi Bharati had written himself into the history of India. The
Poet's prophetic consciousness manifested itself as "Psalms of
Patriotism," hailed ever since as "Desopanishad."
Sarojini Naidu declared: "Bharati kindled the souls of men by the
million to a more passionate love of freedom and a richer dedication to
the service of the country," Fully alive to the multifoliate splendour
of Bharati, Jawahar lal Nehru affirmed: "Bharati is not only the poet of
Tamil Nadu, he belongs also to the whole India. His verses should be
published in all the Indian languages." A similar appeal couched in
impassioned words was made by Bharatidasan, decades ago. "Bharati's
vastitudes can be known only when (the poems of the great one, in Tamil,
are translated into the languages bf the world.") This volume, we
daresay, marks the partial fulfilment of Paventar's noble dream.
Byron and Shelley -- the true soldiers of Goddess Liberty -- were in.
some measure the inspirers of the Mahakavi, who in all humility, called
himself Shelleydasan. Prof. K.Swaminathan's dictum in this connection is
significant. "In the course of his evolution from Shelleydasan as he
used to describe himself earlier, to Saktidasan (devotee of Sakti,
Goddess of Energy), Bharati reflected the great change which
transformed, India, a British dependency into a self-reliant power."
Bharati authored the New Poetry in Tamil, which in the words of Prof.
K.R.Srinivasa Iyengar, was "at once radiantly autochthonous and
bracingly modern." From a mere versifier, he grew, in no time, to be an
authentic poet of mysticism by his willing submissions to the compelling
rhythm of a larger life. He was able to push back the barricades of the
self, one by one, till at last, his life became one of intuitive love.
"Love" said the poet, "is my religion," and no one practised it as the
poet did. His incandescent and piercing intellect burnt all dichotomies
away. Everything that he beheld was nothing but "the ardent
self-expression of that Immanent Being," a lila, a musical manifestation
of creative joy. Kaakkai and Kuruvi, "the scuttering insects, the little
soft populations of the grass," Katal and Malai and all things animate
as well as inanimate, were his comrades and his intense love asserted
itself in the most suasive way in every one of his poems. To read his
poem is to feel the beating of a benign heart, the upleap of a beatific
joy -- greater, vaster and richer than anything that one has known. By
cultivating Bharati, the aspirant will, sooner or later, discover his
fraternal link with all things; he will by and by perceive in the Many
the clear and palpable presence of the One: "the changeless and absolute
Life, manifesting itself in all the myriad nascent, crescent, cadent
lives."
Any translation is but an experiment. A work worth translating has about
it a charm that defies transplantation. The lustre of the original grows
pallescent in the hands of even the ablest of translators. What is
achievable and is usually achieved by a trained hand, is only
readability coupled with dependability. If this is made possible, the
translator has not flexed his transcreative muscle in vain.
This work which contains the complete English version of the Mahakavi's
poems as well as prose poems, is the fruit of the collective endeavour
of a number of savants. For the first time, the reader has before him
the Englished version of all the poems of Bharati -- the Bard of Bharat.
The Tamil University merits no mean accolade for this achievement. It
has already brought out an edition of the poems of Bharati in Tamil,
chronologi cally arranged. This work in English punctiliously follows
the Tamil edition. A few poems, however, are omitted as they are not
from the quill of Bharati's.
The craftsmanship of Bharati, as revealed by his juvenilia, is pretty
conventional and is rather dull. However, as years roll by, his
irresistible genius starts asserting itself with a wondrous splendour
that is truly multi dimensional. The myriad-minded bard's apperception
is achieved with a thousand tentacles of awareness and his utterances --
afire with burning desire --, shoot out like piercing pins of light. His
words and vocables ener gised by a novel poetic fervour, march out,
suaviter in modo, fortiter in re, and make a universal conquest.
Almost all the translators of Bharati are represented in this work. Each
one in his own way has endeavoured to bring alive in his translation the
spirit of the original. Our selection is informed by the sincerity of
purpose which has guided each one of them in his labour of love.
Bharati has translated the poems of Sri Aurobindo, John Scurr and
Rabindranath Tagore. He has also translated a couple of lines from
H.W.Longfellow. His Tamil versions of these poets form part of his
poetical works. We have therefore included in this volume the originals.
As the poem of Tagore is not traceable, I have done the translation in
this connection.
Prof. A.E.Asher has gone through the work with sympathy and understand
ing. Thanks to his suggestions and corrections, the work is no longer
marred by major flaws.
We have provided useful and brief notes wherever necessary. An index to
the first lines of the Tamil poems is appended to this volume. It is not
alphabetically arranged. However it is in accordance with the order of
the poems (Tamil as well English) as published by the University. This
will facilitate easy reference.
We render our heart-felt thanks to Dr. S.Agesthialingom, the revered
Vice-Chancellor of the Tamil University, for conceiving, processing and
implementing the grand scheme of "TRANSLATION: TAMIL WORKS."
We render our special thanks to Thiru Seeni Viswanathan for having
helped us in the preparation of the Reading List appended to this
volume.
This volume -- so are we prone to think --, typifies the tribute of the
devotees of Tamil to Mother Tamil and Her son -- Bharati, the Mahakavi.
Thanjavur,       Sekkizhar Adi-p-Podi
20-7-1989.       T.N.Ramachandran
-----------
LIST OF TRANSLATORS
P.N.A - Thiru P.N.Appuswami
R.E.A. - Prof. R.E.Asher
C.S.B. - Mahakavi C.Subramania Bharati.
D.B. - Thiru David Buck
K.C. Prof. K. Chellappan
J.H.C. -- James H.Cousins -
H.J. Prof. Hephzibah Jesudasan
Mrs.K. - Prof. (Mrs.) Koppedrayer
P.M. - Prof. P.Mahadevan
P.N. - Dr. Prema Nandakumar
C.R. - Thiru C.Rajagopalachariar -
T.N.R. Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
S.R.K. - Prof. S.Ramakrishnan
A.K.R. Prof. A.K.Ramanujan
S.R. - Prof. S.Raman
S.A.S. - Thiru S.A.Sankaranarayanan
K.G.S. - Prof. K.G.Seshadri -
A.S.R. Prof. A.Srinivasa Raghavan
P.S.S. - Prof. P.S.Sundaram
K.S. - Prof. K.Swaminathan
--------------------
1. eṭṭāpura maṉṉarukku vaṇṇappam‌
1. tiruvaḷar‌ marumat‌ toruvaṉu mayaṉu
mumparu mulaka muṇaroṇap‌ perumaiyō -
ṉampatavaṉeṭ‌ ṭīca ṉaḷirpūm‌ pātat‌
tāmaraip‌ pōtiṉait‌ taṉṉaka niṟīik‌
kāmaṉā ruyartta kaviṉpeṟu veṇkuṭai 5
nērtarūum‌ pūnta ṇittilak‌ kavikai
yārvuṟūm‌um‌ poṉṉula kaḷāviṭa niṟīi
yeṇṇeḻu nāyiṟu meḻukaṭaṟ‌ ṟīviṉum‌
paṇṇava rulakiṉum‌ pātalap‌ puviyiṉu
maṇineṭuñ‌ cakkarat‌ tāṇai niṟīic‌ 10
ceñcoṟ‌ pāvalar‌ cīrmā ṟaṉeṉa
vañciya māṟṟala raṭuṅkūṟ‌ ṟeṉṉa
vañciye ṉallār‌ māmata ṉeṉṉa
viravalar‌ kaṉṉaṉē yeṉṟiṭa maṟṟaip‌
puravalar‌ taṉmaṉiṟ‌ puṇṇiya ṉeṉṟiṭam‌ 15
pārmicait‌ tāṉē pēricai niṟīik‌
kāroṭu mayiliṉaṅ‌ kalantiṭa nīṇmarañ‌
cīroṭu vaḷartta ceḻumpoḻi liḷacaiyi
ṉēroṭu polinta veḻiṉmā ḷikaiyiṟ‌
ṟevvar‌ paṇintiṭac‌ cīriyar‌ vāḻntiṭa 20
-----------
1. An Epistle to the Rajah of Ettaiyapuram (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
An epistle to the lion-hero
Munificent Venkatesa Retta
Of great Ilacai city in the south.
He in whose bosom abides Sri, Brahma,
Heavenly lords and all mankind, cannot
His glory know; He is Lord Etteesa!
His cool lotus feet twain are soul-enshrined
By you; like Kama's fair umbrella white,
Is your flowery parasol pearly,
That soars high and scales the heavenly spheres.
Your ornate disc of royalty holds sway
Over the seven lands, isles of seven seas,
Gandharva land and the nether worlds too.
The bards -- lords of words --, deem you a Pandya;
Affrighted foes deem you the Lord of Death;
Seekers of alms deem you to be Karna;
Patrons hold you more righteous than Dharma;
You yourself your great fame on earth established;
In llacai of great groves and gardens,
Where peacocks dance by nimbi delighted,
In a beauteous and lofty mansion,
Hailed by the wealthy, blessed by the holy,
As cynosure of neighbouring princes,
Like the heavenly lord, you sit enthroned
And rule the world; you are the prince handsome,
The rock-shouldered, the Monarch of monarchs!
May you Venkatesu read this in joy,
This epistle writ by my humble self.
In this sea-girt world thrive many tongues;
Of them the one of excelling glory,
To which the Lord whose crown sports the crescent,
Himself added a rare work, most divine,
Is Tamil great, much sweeter than nectar.
This tongue, alas, is least cared for this day;
Its learners are not benefited now
And it languishes; petty tongues flourish.
In tune with the time-spirit, many types
Of the base and mean now reign-in this world.
So, seeking your grace as palladium
My father came here for his welfare sure.
He bids me learn this alien language.
What am I to do? If Tamil be learnt
Then none will support me; so, oh Karna!
I have now resolved to learn that language;
Yet, how can the poor ones take to learning?
Without money, learning is not possible;
Without learning, money cannot be obtained.
It is but just and proper to learn first.
I have no money for that; so have I
Come to you in this, my very sad plight,
Confident of your rich munificence.
To save the subjects, is the king's duty;
So to poor me, this day grant much money
And all that is needed, in loving grace.
My tongue, accustomed to hail you alone,
Will feel sore sad to beg of other kings.
Will they wallow in a sea of sorrows
Who come to you-the Mother and Refuge!
Ignore not this, as that of a mere boy;
Oh king, foster me by your grace; make me
Known as one who grew lofty by your grace.
May this be the talk of other people.
Grant me this glory! May you flourish sweet!
24-1-1897, I remain,
Your servant llacai Subramanian
Ettaiyapuram.
- Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: Our poet, according to Navalar Somasundara Bharati, was conferred
the title, 'Bharati' when he was eleven years old. From this we can
infer that he lisped in numbers even as a child. It is unfortunate that
none of his poems composed during this period is extant. The bard's
earliest available poem bears the date 24-1-1897 when he was hardly
fifteen years old. The original manuscript of this poem was kept
treasured by our poet's half-brother, Thiru C. Visvanatha Iyer.
-------------
2. kāntimati nāta piḷḷai
kāntimati nāta piḷḷai avarkaḷiṉ pēril pāṭiḻa pākkaḷ (1897-1898)
1. āṇṭil iḷaiyavaṉeṉ ṟantō, akantaiyiṉāl
īṇṭiṅ kikaḻnteṉṉai ēḷaṉañcey - māṇpaṟṟa
kāriruḷpō luḷattāṉ kāntimati nātaṉaip
pārati ciṉṉap payal
2. āṇṭil iḷaiyavaṉeṉ ṟantō arumaiyiṉāl
īṇṭu iṉṟeṉṉai nīēntiṉaiyāl māṇpuṟṟa
kārātupō luḷḷattāṉ kāntimatinātaṟkup
pārati ciṉṉap payal.
------------
2. On Gandhimatinathan (1898) (Prof. R.E.Asher )
1. Through his arrogance, jeering at me
As being young in years
Like a dark heartless storm-cloud
Was Gandhimatinathan; observe
Him, the small fellow.
2. Through his affection blessing me
As being young in years,
Like a generous-hearted rain-cloud
Was Gandhimatinathan, here saluted
By Bharati, the small fellow.
- Prof. R.E.Asher
Note by It will be apparent that the second of these verses is a variant
R.E.Asher: of the first. The difference between the two as composed in
Tamil by Bharati is, inevitably much more subtle. One aspect of this
subtlety that has completely defied translation is the last line, which
in each case is Parati cinna-p-payal. Only in the second version does
this have simply the obvious meaning Bharati, the small fellow. In the
first version there is a somewhat daring pun, the syllable"par" being
given the meaning "see", "ob serve". Thus, the identity of "the small
fellow" is different in the two verses.
---------------------
3. iḷacai orupāvorupaḵtu [1898]
kāppu
nittareṉum‌ teṉṉiḷacai niṉmalaṉār‌ tāmpayanta
attimukat‌ teṅkō ṉaṭiyiṇaiyē - cittitarum‌
eṉṟamiḻi lētu miḻukkilā mēyaḵtu
naṉṟāka veṉṟaruḷu naṉku.
nūl‌
tēṉirunta cōlaikūḻ‌ teṉṉiṉacai naṉṉakariṉ‌
māṉirunta kaiyaṉ‌ malaraṭiyē - vāṉiṟ‌
curartama ṉiyaṉmā ṟoḻuṅkāṟ‌ kirīṭat‌
tarataṉaṅkaḷ‌ cintu makam. ‌ 1
akaliṭattiṟ‌ kōrtilaka māmeṉ‌ ṉiḷacaip‌
pakavaṉeṭ‌ ṭīcaṉ‌ patamē - tikiri
poruntukarat‌ tāṉaṉṟōr‌ pōttiriyāyt‌ tēṭi
varuntiyumē kāṇāccel‌vam‌. 2
celva miraṇṭum‌ ceḻittōṅkut‌ teṉṉiḷacai
yilvaḷaru mīca ḷeḻiṟpatamē - velvayira
mēntukarat‌ tāṉkariya veṇkaṇaṉṟa muḷḷattup‌
pōttuvaḷar‌ kiṉṟa poruḷ‌. 3
poruḷāḷarīya vēṟpōriḷacai
maruḷāḷa nīca raṭiyē – teruḷcēr
tamaṉā maṟaiyavaṉmēṟ ṟaṉpāca miṭṭa
camaṉāvi vāṅkumpā cam. 4
caṅkat tavaḻkaḻaṉi taṇ iḷacai naṉṉakaril
eṅkaḷ civaṉār eḻiṟpatamē- tuṅkamikum
vētamuṭiyiṉ micaiyē viḷaṅkunaṟ
cōtiyeṉa neñcē tuṇi. 5
tuṇinilavār ceñcaṭaiyaṉ tōḷ iḷacai ūraṉ
maṇikaṇṭaṉ pātamalarē – piṇinarakil
vīḻaccey yātu virumpiyaīn tēaṭiyar
vāḻaccey kiṉṟa maruntu. 6
maruḷaṟak kaṟṟōrkaṇ maruviḷacai ūril
varumiṟaivaṉ pāta malarē – tiruvaṉ
viraimalarā vaṭṭaviḻiyām viyaṉṟā
maraipūtta centā marai. 7
tāmaraiyiṉ mutteṅkun tāṉcitaṟun teṉṉiḷacaik
kōmāṉeṭ ṭīcaṉmalar koḷpatamē – nāmavēl
vallarakkaṉ kailai varaiyeṭutta kālavaṉai
allaṟ paṭavaṭartta tāl. 8
āla viḻiyā ravarmulainēr taṇvaraicūḻ
kōla maṇi iḷacaik kōṉpatamē – cīla
muṉivar viṭutta muyalakaṉ mītēṟit
taṉinaṭaṉañ ceytatuvē tāṉ. 9
tāṉē paramporuḷān taṇṇiḷacai yeṭṭīcaṉ
tēṉēy kamalamalarc cīraṭiyē – yāṉēmuṉ
ceytaviṉai tīrttuc civānantam poṅkiyaruḷ
eytiṭavuñ ceyyum eṉai. 10
taṉi
kaṉṉaṉeṉum eṅkaḷ karuṇaivēṅka ṭēcuraṭṭa
maṉṉavaṉ pōṟṟuciva māṇaṭiyē – aṉṉavaṉum
innūlun teṉṉāriḷacaiyeṉum naṉṉakarum
ennāḷum vāḻavaikku mē. 11
ātāram: cakti veḷiyīṭu – pakkam 475 – 476
--------
3. Ilacai Eleven (1898) (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
Note: The title of this poem is Ilacai Oru Pa Oru Paktu.
As indicated by the title, this poem comprises eleven stanzas in Venpa
metre, on the presiding deity of Ilacai which is Ettaiyapuram.
Invocation
The two feet of the elephant-faced Lord,
The Son of the Eternal One blemishless
Of South Ilacai, will grant beatitude,
Bless my Tamil and make it unsullied.
1. When at the flower-feet of Him whose hand
Sports the deer and enshrined in South Ilacai
Bounded by honied groves, fall skyey lords,
Brahma and Vishnu in humble worship,
Gems from their crowns fall and scatter on earth.
2. It is like the world's tilak, this llacai
Where our Etteesan the Lord is enshrined;
His two feet are the wealth that could not be eyed
By him--the wielder of the Disc --, who once fretted
And quested after them as a boar divine.
3. In South Ilacai where thrives twofold wealth
Are enshrined the Lord's beauteous feet twain;
These indeed are nourished in the bosoms
Of Indra the lord of fell thunderbolt,
Vishnu the dark One and eight-eyed Brahma.
4. llacai's Lord, the queller of darkness
Deigns to receive when the rich give away;
His feet -- the lariat--, drew in the life of Death
Who durst claim the life of the Brahmin-boy
Dear to the Lord and blessed with clarity.
5. O heart, know this for sure; the shapely feet
Of Siva enshrined in cool Ilacai
Where shell-fish crawl in fields,
Are the benign light That ever glows atop the lofty Vedas.
6. The nectarine flower-feet of the Lord,
The blue-throated One of crimson locks,
The God of Ilacai, save the devotees
From the fettering Hell, and grant them
Whatever their longing minds are after.
7. The flower-feet of the Lord of Ilacai
Where abide the clear-minded intellects
Are adorned by the fragrant eye-flower
Of the Consort of Lakshmi, and flowers
Of divine lotuses incarnadine.
8. The flower-feet of King Etteesan
Of Ilacai where the pearls of lotuses
Lie scattered all over, are they that crushed
And sorely pained the great Asura fearsome
Who durst lift aloft Mount Kailas itself.
9. The King's feet of comely Ilacai ornate
Girdled by the cool hills, hard as the breasts
Of women whose eyes are with poison filled,
Are they that danced peerless on Muyalaka
Who was by the Munis set against Him.
10. The famous feet, honied and lotus-like,
Of Ilacai's Lord Etteesan who is
The Ens Entium will sure divest me
Of all my past Karma, steep me in bliss,
Siva's own--, and confer on me grace too.
11. Siva's majestic feet, hailed by our king
Karna-likė, kindly Venkatesu Retta ---,
Will foster him, this, my work, and also
Goodly Ilacai in the South for ever.
- Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
-----------------
4. kuyilaṉāy! niṉṉoṭu kulaviyiṉ kalavi - mutaṟ pāṭal
taṉimai yirakkam
kuyilaṉāy! niṉṉoṭu kulaviyiṉ kalavi
payilvatiṟ kaḻitta paṉṉāḷ niṉaintu piṉ
iṉṟeṉak kiṭaiyē eṇṇil yōcaṉaippaṭum
kuṉṟamum vaṉamum koḻitiraip puṉalum
mēviṭap purinta vitiyaiyum niṉaittāl
pāviyeṉ neñcam pakīreṉal aritō?
kalaṅkarai viḷakkoru kāvatam kōṭiyā
malaṅkumōr ciṟiya marakkalam pōṉṟēṉ
muṭampaṭu tiṉaṅkāḷ! muṉṉaryāṉ avaḷuṭaṉ
uṭampoṭum uyireṉa uṟṟuvāḻ nāṭkaḷil
vaḷiyeṉap paṟantanīr maṟṟiyāṉ eṉātu
kiḷiyiṉaip pirintuḻik kiriyeṉak kiṭakkum
ceyalai yeṉ iyampuval civaṉē!
mayalaiyiṟ ṟeṉṟevar vakupparaṅ kavaṭkē?
---------------
4. A Sonnet on Solitude (July, 1904) (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
O lady kuyil-like, getting oned with you
And joying, I have spent many a day;
When I think of this and things countless too,
Driving me as by fate to tread the way
In hills and jungles and billowed waters,
My sinner-heart is seized by sudden terror;
I feel bewildered like a bark that falters
Miles and miles off the lighthouse in error.
O lame, limping days! with her inseparate
Even as body and life, when I dwelt,
Like wind you sped away; now when my fate,
Keeps her off, your heavy weight is by me felt.
O Siva, what am I to say of this?
Who can ever to her convey my lost bliss?
-Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original is the earliest of the printed poems of our
poet which appeared in a monthly called Viveka Bhanu, the editor of
which was the reputed poet Mu.Raa.Kandaswami Kavirayar. The English
version is a sonnet, following the Tamil original.
-------------------
5. cāṟṟukkavikaḷ‌
centaṇmai pūṇṭoḻukuk‌ tiṟantāṉē
      yaṟavōrtañ‌ ciṟappu vāynta
antaṇarap‌ piramarilai yaṟikuīrē
      pirāmaṇareṉ‌ ṟaḷavi jūṟkaḷ‌
cantatamuṅ‌ kūṟiyatait‌ tērāmē
      piṟappoṉṟāṟ‌ narukki nāmē,
enta neṟi yuṭaiyacpiṟa reṉiṉumavar‌
      cūttirareṉ‌ nikaḻkiṉ‌ ṟēmāl‌. 1
mēḻikoṭu nilaḻumutu vāḻvatuvē       mutalvāḻkkai) vēta mōtal‌
vāḻiyanati vuñciṟappām‌, maṟṟavivai
      yiraṇṭaṉukkum‌ vallār‌ tammaip‌
pāḻililar‌ kaṭaikkulattā reṉpatupē
      taimaiyaṉṟō? pārkkuṅ‌ kālaik‌
kūḻivarē piṟarkkaḷippar‌ nilaemuṭaivai
      ciyareṉṟē koḷvā maṉṉō. 2
paṉṉāḷā vēḷāḷar‌ cūttirareṉ‌
      ṟeṇṇivarum‌ paḻampoy‌ taṉṉai
oṉṉārpaṟ‌ palarnāṇa “*varuṇacintā
      maṇi' meṉṉu muṇmai vāḷāṟ‌
ciṉṉāpiṉ‌ ṉampurintu puviyiṉaraik‌
      kaṭappaṭuttāṉ‌ ceṉṉai vāḻu
naṉṉāva lōrperumāṉ‌ kaṉakacapaip‌
      piḷḷaiyeṉu nāmat‌ tāṉē. 3
--------------
5. In Praise of Varuna Chintamani (1904-1905) (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
1. "As loving kindness marks them
Even as exemplary virtue,
As they know of God's nature
They came to be called the Brahmins".
Although many works aver thus,
We feel proud by mere birth, alas
And condemn others as Sudras
What though their true way of life be.
2. Life linked to ploughing is indeed
The first and the best in the world,
Chanting Vedas is even better.
To call them that are qualified
For these two, the least of the clans,
Is idiocy; the truth is,
It is only these who feed others;
We'll hail them as landed Vysias.
3. He is Kanakasabhai Pillai
Who flourishes great in Madras;
With 'Varuna Chintamani',
His dagger of truth, putting foes
To shame, he has cut to pieces
The old lie which for many years
Held Velalas to be Sudras;
To him is this world indebted.
- Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original appeared as a laudatory poem sung by Bharati in
honour of the work, Varuna Chintamani', Written by Kanakasabhai Pillai.
---------------
6, tātāpāy‌ īvurōji (kavikaḷ‌ )
muṉṉāḷi lirāmapirāṉ‌ kōtamaṉā
      tiyaputalvar‌ muṟaiyi ṉīṉṟu
paṉṉāṭu muṭivaṇaṅkat‌ talaimaikiṟut‌
      tiyavematu parata kaṇṭa
miṉṉāḷiṅ‌ kinnāḷiṉ‌ mutiyōḷāyp‌
      piṟareḷḷa vīḻnta kālai
yaṉṉāḷait‌ tuyartavirppāṉ‌ muyalvarcila
      makkaḷava raṭikaḷ‌ cūḻvām‌. 1
avvaṟiña raṉaivōrackku mutalvaṉā
      maintaṉṟa ṉaṉṉai kaṇṇī
revvakaiyi ṉuntuṭaippē ṉiṉṟēleṉ‌
      luyirtuṭaippē ṉeṉṉap‌ pōranti'
peḷavaṉakāḷ‌ mutaṟkoṭutā ṉeṇpatiṉmēl‌
      vayatuṟṟa viṉṟu kāṟum‌
cevviyuṟat‌ taṉatuṭalam‌ poruḷāvi
      yāṉuḻaipput‌ tīrta lillāṉ‌.
kalviyaippō laṟivumaṟi viṉaippōlak‌
      karuṇaiyumak‌ karuṇai pōlap‌
palvitavūk‌ kaṅkaḷceyuk‌ tiṟaṉumoru
      nikariṉṟip‌ paṭaitta vīraṉ‌
vilviṟalāṟ‌ pōrceytal‌ payaṉilatā
      meṉavataṉai veṟuttē yuṇmaic‌
colviṟalāṟ‌ pōrceyvōṉ‌ pinarkkaṉṟit‌
      taṉakkuḻaiyāt‌ tuṟavi yāvōṉ‌. 3
mātāvāy‌ viṭṭalaṟa vataicciṟitu
      matiyātē vāṇāḷ‌ pōkkun‌
tītāvār‌ variṉumavark‌ kiṉiyacoli
      3ṉkuṇarttuñ‌ cevvi yāḷaṉ‌
vētāvā yiṉumavatuk‌ kañcāmē
      yuṇmaireṟi virippō ḷeṅkaḷ‌
tātāvāy‌ viḷaṅkuṟunaṟ‌! ṟātāpāy‌
      navurōji caraṇam‌ vāḻcu! 4
eṇpaḵtāṇ‌ ṭiruntavava ṉiṉippallāṇ‌
      ṭiruntemmai yiṉitu kākka!
paṇpalla īmakkiḻaippō raṟivutirun‌
      tuka!vematu parata kāṭṭup‌”
peṇpallār‌ vayiṟṟiṉuman‌ 3vurōji
      pōṟputalvar‌ piṟantu vāḻka!
viṇpullu mīṉkaḷeṉa vavaḷaṉṉā
      revavayiṉu mikuka maṉṉō. 5
-------------
6. On Dadhabhai Naoroji (September, 1905) (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
1. Bharat great of yore gave birth to such sons
As godly Rama and Gautama who
The stewardship of many a nation
Secured for Her; this day, alas this day,
She has into decadence, fallen
And is held in derision by others; To rid Her sorrow a few endeavour
And we, the feet of these, gratefully hail.
2. He is the born-leader of those wise ones,
The beloved son of Bharat; he has vowed
To wipe out somehow the tears of Mother Or in that endeavour give up his
life.
From his youth and even now when he is
An octogenarian, to this cause
He has nobly dedicated his wealth
Body and dear life, and strives tirelessly.
3. An intellect, to match his vast learning,
A compassion, to match his intellect
And a capacity--to persevere
In many ways-, to match his compassion
Are his, the hero's matchless endowments.
He will not war with bows, futile weapons;
Words he wields, and this selfless sanyasi
For ever works for the good of others.
4. When Mother cries in anguish, evil ones
Are totally blind to it and live in ease.
If these come to him, even to them he is
Soft, and preaches good, this man of culture.
He can even cross swords with Brahma
To explicate the ways of lasting truth.
A patron true he is, our Dadhabhai;
May this old venerable seer's life, span
Many more years gracefully to guard us!
May the doers of evil vile, reform!
May the women great of Mother Bharat
Give birth to sons like Dadhabhai Naoroji!
May those sons teem and flourish for ever
Like innumerable stars that stud the sky!
May men like unto him flourish everywhere!
- Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: Bharati wrote an article on Dadhabhai Naoroji and it appeared in
Chakravartini. His article concluded with the poem here translated.
----------------
7. vaṅkamē vāḻiya
(vaṅka vāḻttuk‌ kavikaḷ‌)
aṅka mētaḷar‌ veytiya kuralaiyum‌
      aṅkōr‌ puṉṉari tantiṭu mūṉuṇāc‌
ciṅka mēyeṉa vāḻtal‌ ciṟappeṉāc‌
      cemmai kūṟinan‌ tāypperun‌ tēyattaip‌
paṅka mēpeṟu mikkilai niṉṟuyar‌
      paṇṭai māṇpiṭaik‌ koṇṭiṉi tuyattiṭum‌
vaṅka mēyeṉa vantaṉai vāḻi!
      vaṅka mēīṉi vāḻiya vāḻiya!       1
kaṟpa kantarup‌ pōletu kēṭpilum‌
      kaṭitu nalkiṭum‌ pārata nāṭṭiḷiṟ‌
poṟpu ṟappiṟak‌ tēm‌,namak‌ kōrjitap‌
      poruñu maṉṉiya rītalpo ṟukkilēm‌.
aṟpar‌ pōlap‌ piṟarkara nōkkiyā
      mavaṉi lāḻtalā kāteṉa īṉkitai
vaṟpu ṟuttiṭat‌ tōṉṟiya teylamē!
      vaṅka mēṉi vāḻiya vāḻiya!       2
kaṇṇi vīrtuṭaip‌ pāypuṉ‌ ekaikoḷvāy‌
      kaviṉu numpara tapperun‌ tēviyē
uṇṇi kaḻntiṭum‌ tuṉpaṅ‌ kaḷaitiyāl‌
      uṉṟaṉ‌ maintarkaḷ‌ mēṉeṟi yuṟṟaṉar‌
peṇṇi ṉeñciṟ‌ kitameṉa lāvatu
      peṟṟa piḷḷaikaḷ‌ pīṭuṟavē yaṉṟō?
maṇṇi sīpukaḻ‌ mēviṭa vāḻttiya
      vaṅka mēṉi vāḻiya vāḻiya!       3
-----------
7. In Praise of Bengal (15-9-1905) (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
1. Even when limbs grow weak, for its food
The lion accepts not the flesh
Offered by a fox; she honours
Such lion-like greatness and strives
To uplift the Motherland great
From her fallen state to her former Majesty; she comes as a ship
Of weal; may she -- Bengal, flourish!
2. In Bharat-land that grants at once,
The thing wished for, like Karpaka,
In fame were we born; never would we
Accept gifts from Strangers or aliens;
You our god, have come to urge sure
We should not thrive like petty men
Looking up to others at all!
May you for ever flourish well!
3. Beauteous Bharat great!
Wipe out your tears and smile!
Weed out all your inner worries!
Your sons have grown lofty indeed.
That which gives weal to woman's heart
Is indeed her sons' glory great! \br| May Bengal that blesses you with
Life glorious, flourish for ever!
- Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original appeared in Swadesamitran. The poem was earlier
sung by Bharati in a meeting of Swadesi-students, arranged in the Madras
beach.
------------
8. jātīya kītam
(paṅkim cantira caṭṭō pāttiyāyar eḻutiya
vantē mātaram kītattiṉ moḻipeyarppu)
iṉiya nīrp perukkiṉai! iṉkaṉi vaḷattiṉai!
taṉinaṟu malayat taṇkāṟ ciṟappiṉai!
painniṟap paḻaṉam paraviya vaṭiviṉai! (vantē)
veṇṇilāk katirmakiḻ virittiṭum iraviṉai!
malar maṇip pūttikaḻ maraṉpala ceṟintaṉai!
kuṟunakai yiṉcolār kulaviya māṇpiṉai!
nalkuvai iṉpam, varampala nalkuvai! (vantē)
muppatukōṭi vāy (niṉṉicai) muḻaṅkavum
aṟupatu kōṭitō ḷuyarntuṉak kāṟṟavum
tiṟaṉilāḷ eṉṟuṉai yāvaṉē ceppuvaṉ?
aruntiṟa luṭaiyāy! aruḷiṉaip pōṟṟi!
poruntalar paṭaipuṟat toḻittiṭum poṟpiṉai!
(vantē)
nīyē vittai nīyē tarumam!
nīyē itayam nīyē marumam!
uṭalakat tirukkum uyirumaṉ nīyē! (vantē)
taṭantō ḷakalāc caktinī ammē!
cittam nīṅkātuṟu paktiyum nīyē!
ālayan tōṟum aṇipeṟa viḷaṅkum
teyvika vaṭivamum tēviyiṅ kuṉatē! (vantē)
orupatu paṭaikoḷum umaiyavaḷ nīyē!
kamalamel litaḻkaḷiṟ kaḷittiṭuṅ kamalainī!
vittai naṉ karuḷum veṇmalart tēvinī! (vantē)
pōṟṟi vāṉcelvi! puraiyilai nikarilai!
iṉiya nīrpp perukkiṉai, iṉkaṉi vaḷattiṉai
cāmaḷa niṟattiṉai caraḷamān takaiyiṉai!
iṉiyapuṉ muṟuvalāy! ilaṅkunal laṇiyiṉai!
tarittemaik kāppāy, tāyē pōṟṟi! (vantē)
------------
8. Song of the Nation (November, 1905) (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
1. Rich with lovely streams and luscious fruitage,
Cool with the soft, peerless winds of the south,
And green with the crops of fields, are you, Mother.
2. Your nights are argent with moon-rayed brightness;
Your are thick with trees in efflorescence;
Bright is your smile and your speech nectarine;
You are free with your many boons of bliss.
3. Your glory is sounded by thirty crores
Of throats, sixty crores of puissant shoulders
Arę armed for you; who can ever call you weak?
Rare is your might; grace you grant us; praise be!
You rout and quell the armies of your foes.
4. You are knowledge; you are dharma indeed;
You are our heart; you are our very soul;
You are also the life in our body.
5. You are the strength of the shoulder, Mother!
You are the Heart -- the abode of Bhakti!
In every temple is only installed
Your glorious form, ornate and divine.
6. You are Uma with the ten dread weapons!
You are Lakshmi throned on lotus-petals!
You are Vani, the grantor of all lore!
7. You are of endless wealth, "pure and peerless;
You are rich with sweet streams and luscious fruitage,
Blue-hued are you; candour is your nature;
Bright is your smile; your jewels -- a glory;
Pray protect us, peerless Mother! Praise be!
- Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original itself is a translation of Bankim Chandra
Chatterji's Bengali poem beginning with the words, "Vande Mataram". That
was a poem on Bengal. Credit goes to Bharati for converting it into one
on India as a whole. Bharati's version appeared in Chakravartini,
Swadesamitran and India.
------------------
9. mēlōr pukaḻai virikkuñ caritaiyelām
mēlōr pukaḻai virikkuñ caritaiyelām
ēṉōrkkō ruṇmai yuṇarttuma teṉṉaiyēl
(ūkkattāl) yāmumem vāḻkkai yuyarvuṭaiya
tākkiṭa vallē meṉal.
---------
9. From: A Psalm of Life (December, 1905)
"The lives of great men all remind us
We can make our lives sublime".
- H.W.L.
Note: The Tamil version of the above lines is found in an article by
Bharati on Gopala Krishna Gokhale which appeared in Chakravartini.
------------------
10. vēls iḷavaracarukku nalvaravu
āciriyappā
varuka celva! vāḻkamaṉ nīyē!
vaṭamēṟ ṟicaikkaṇ māperun tolaiyiṉōr
poṟciṟu tīvakap puravalaṉ payanta
naṟṟavak putalva! nalvara vuṉatē!
mētaka nīyumniṉ kātalaṅ kiḷiyum
eṉṟaṉaik kāṇumā ṟittaṉai kātam
vantaṉir!vāḻtir!eṉ maṉammakiḻn tatuvē
celvakēḷ! eṉṉarum cēykaḷai niṉṉuṭai
muṉṉōr āṭci toṭaṅkuṟūum muṉṉar
neñcelām puṇṇāy niṉṟaṉaṉ yāaṉ.
āyira varuṭam aṉpilā anniyar
āṭciyiṉ viḷainta allalkaḷ eṇṇila.
pōṉatai eṇṇip pulampiyiṅ keṉpayaṉ?
maṟṟuṉ nāṭṭiṉōr vantataṉ piṉṉar,
akattiṉil cilapuṇ āṟutal eytiṉa.
pōrttokai aṭaṅkieṉ ēḻaip puttirar
amaitipeṟ ṟuyva rāyiṉar. eṉvē,
pārata tēvi paḻamaipōl tiruvaruḷ
poḻikara luṟṟaṉaḷ,poruḷceyaṟ kuriya
toḻiṟkaṇam palappala tōṉṟiṉa,piṉṉum
koṭumatap pāvikaḷ kuṟumpelām akaṉṟaṉa.
yāṟṟiṉiṟ peṇkaḷai eṟivatūum,iratat
turuḷaiyiṟ pālarai uyiruṭaṉ māyttalum,
peṇṭiraik kaṇavartam piṇattuṭaṉ erittalum,
eṉappala tīmaikaḷ iṟantupaṭ ṭaṉavāl.
mēṟṟicai iruḷiṉai veruṭṭiya ñāṉa
oṇperuṅ katiriṉ ōriru kiraṇam eṉ
pālariṉ mītu paṭutaluṟ ṟaṉavē.
āyiṉum eṉṉai?āyiraṅ kōṭi
tollaikaḷ iṉṉum tolaintaṉa villai.
nalkura vāti navamām tollaikaḷ
āyiram eṉaivan taṭaintuḷa numarāl
eṉiṉumiṅ kivaiyelām iṟaivaṉ aruḷāl
nīṅkuva vaṉṟi nilaippaṉa valla.
nōyelān tavirppāṉ numarē eṉakku.
maruttuva rāka vantaṉar eṉpatūum
poyyilai.ātaliṟ pukaḻpeṟum āṅkila
nāṭṭiṉa reṉṟum nalamuṟa vāḻkavē!
eṉṉaruñ cēykaḷum ivarumnaṭ peyti
irupāṉ maiyarkkum iṉṉaloṉ ṟiṉṟi
oruvarai yoruvar oṟuttiṭa lilātu,
cevvitiṉ vāḻka!ac cīrmiku cātiyiṉ
iṟaivaṉām untai iṉpoṭu vāḻka!
vāḻka nī! vāḻkaniṉ maṉameṉum iṉiya
vērimeṉ malarvāḻ mērinal laṉṉam!
maṟṟeṉ cēykaḷ vāḻiya! vāḻiya!
------------
10. Welcome to the Prince of Wales
(Sung as bidden by Mother Bharat) (29-1-1906) (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
Welcome, Prince! Long may you live!
The precious son of a great king
Of an island far in the West,
You deserve to be welcomed.
Royal Highness, you and your wife
Have come across these thousands of leagues
Just to see me. Hail, all hail!
Listen to my words that come spontaneous
From a full and joyous heart.
Before your fathers started to rule
My loved children in this land
My heart was riddled with a hundred sores
Caused by the numberless torments inflicted
By unloving aliens for a thousand years.
No use now to grieve over the past.
When your people came after them
Some of those sores have been healed.
Wars were no more and my poor sons
Could live at last in peace, and secure.
Once again upon my land as of old
The grace of God, rains in abundance.
Many new industries arose
In the land to create wealth.
Besides, all the horrors ceased
Of cruel religious fanatics.
Female infants thrown into rivers,
Children crushed under chariot wheels,
Widows burnt with their husbands' corpses,
And other such evils disappeared.
A ray or two from that sun of knowledge
Which pierced the darkness in the West
Found their way here to light my sons.
But still a billion problems
Remain unsolved.
Poverty and a thousand other
New evils have come with you.
Still all these through God's grace
Will fade away, not strike root.
All diseases your men will cure.
That they came with medicines is no lie.
And so for ever let them flourish,
The people of England worthy of fame.
My dear children and those united
In a friendship devoid of pinpricks
Neither in any way hurting the other
Live well together! And your father the king
Of that fair race, may he be happy!
Live you, and she, Mary your love,
The gentle swan in your heart's sweet lake!
And my own dear children, long may they live!
- Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original appeared in Swadesamitran. Bharati was happy
to welcome the Prince of Wales as can be seen from his article seria
lised in November-December (1905) issues of Chakravartini. The Prince
referred to here is George, afterwards King George V.
--------------
11. makāmakōpāttiyāyar
cempariti oḷipeṟṟāṉ;painnaṟavu
      cuvaipeṟṟut tikaḻntatu;āṅkaṇ
umparelām iṟavāmai peṟṟaṉareṉṟu
      evarēkol uvattal ceyvār?
kumpamuṉi yeṉattōṉṟum cāminā
      tappulavaṉ kuṟaivil kīrtti
pampaluṟap peṟṟaṉaṉēl,itaṟkeṉkol
      pēruvakai paṭaik kiṉṟīrē?
aṉṉiyarkaḷ tamiḻccelvi yaṟiyātār
      iṉṟemmai āḷvō rēṉum,
paṉṉiyacīr makāmakō pāttiyā
      yappatavi parivuṉ īntu
poṉṉilavu kuṭantainakarc cāminā
      taṉṟaṉakkup pukaḻcey vārēl,
muṉṉivaṉap pāṇṭiyarnāḷ iruntiruppiṉ
      ivaṉperumai moḻiya lāmō?
‘nitiya ṟiyōm,ivvulakat torukōṭi
      iṉpavakai nittam tuykkum
katiyaṟi yōm’ eṉṟumaṉam varuntaṟka;
      kuṭantainakark kalaiñar kōvē!
potiyamalaip piṟanta moḻi vāḻvaṟiyum
      kālamelām pulavōr vāyil
tutiyaṟivāy,avarneñciṉ vāḻttaṟivāy,
      iṟappiṉṟit tulaṅku vāyē.
-----------------
11. On Dr. U.V.Swaminatha Iyer (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
1. "The red sun is resplendent; fresh honey
Is passing sweet; the celestials are
With immortality endowed." Will any
Over these rejoice? If Swaminatha
The poet who is like sage Agastyar
Comes by blemishless renown unending,
Is' that a matter for celebration?
Why do you all revel in delight great?
2. We are this day by the aliens governed;
Even though they know not of Tamil's greatness
They in love, have on great Swaminatha
Of golden Kudanthai city,
The title "Mahamahopadhyaya"
Conferred; thus is he by them this day hailed.
Had he flourished during the olden times
Of Pandyas, could words spell out his fame?
3. "Silver and gold have I none; nor am I
In any way blessed to partake daily
Of the many million joys of this world"..
Think not so and despair, oh King of bards
Of Kudanthai. The praise of Tamil bards
So long as that Potika-bred tongue lasts,
Shall be yours; their hearts will always bless you;
You will surely thrive deathless for ever.
-Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original appeared in Chakravartini. The original
manuscript of this poem was preserved by Dr. U.V.Swaminatha Iyer and is
now in the custody of the library which bears the name of lyer. The poem
was sung in honour of Iyer who was the recipient of the title, Maha
mahopadhyaya.
-----------------
12. vaṅtē mātaram
āriya meṉṟa perumpeyar koṇṭave maṉṉaiyiṉ mītutikaḻ
      aṉpeṉu meṉkoṭi vāṭiya kālai yataṟkuyir tantiṭuvāṉ
māri yeṉumpaṭi vantu ciṟantatu vantē mātaramē
      māṇuyar pārata tēviyiṉ mantiram vantē mātaramē
vīriya ñāṉa marumpukaḻ maṅkiṭa mēvinal āriyarai
      miñci vaḷaintiṭu puṉmai yiruṭkaṇam vīvuṟa vaṅkamakā
vāriti mīti leḻunta iḷaṅkatir vantē mātaramē
      vāḻina lāriya tēviyiṉ mantiram vantē mātaramē.
kāraṭar poṉmuṭi, vāṉi mayantaru kaṅkai varampiṉilum
      kaṉṉiyai vantoru teṉṟicai yārkali kātal ceyāyiṭaiyum
vīrarkaḷ miñci viḷaṅku pumuaital vēṟuḷa ārkaḷilum
      viñcai yeṉumpaṭi yaṉpuṭaṉ yārum viyantiṭu mantiramum
pārata tēca virōtikaḷ neñcu pataittiṭu mantiramum
      pātaka rōtiṉu mētaka vuṟṟiṭu paṇpuyar mantiramum
vāra muṟuñcuvai yiṉṉaṟa vuṉkaṇi vāṉa marunteṉavē
      māṉuyar pārata tēvi virumpiṭum vantē mātaramē.
-------
12. Vande Mataram, the Mantra (February, 1906.) (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
)
When the soft liana called Love
That grows on Motherland Arya
Doth wilt, to infuse it with life,
Like rain comes Vande Mataram.
Lofty Bharat-Devi's sublime
Mantra is Vande Mataram.
When brave wisdom and rare glory
Of noble Aryas do languish
They being in base murk immersed,
That which rises with its young rays
Over the Bay of Bengal great
To chase away the darkness dense
Is Vande Mataram; it is
The Mantra of Arya-Devi.
May the noble goddess flourish:
May Vande Mataram flourish!
From the shores of Ganga that flows
From the cloud-capped Himalayas
To Kanya Kumari in the South
Where flows the Indian Ocean,
From Pune where heroes abound
To various other cities,
The wondrous mantra that in love
Is chanted, the mantra at which Foes shudder, is Vande Mataram.
Even if sinners chant this mantra
They 'll attain to culture sublime;
It is heavenly nectar; it is
The lovely taste of honied fruits;
It is the mantra cherished by Ever-glorious Bharat-Devi.
Ah, it is Vande Mataram!
-Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The original Tamil poem appeared in Chakravartini (Feb., 1906) and
in Swadesamitran (24-2-1906).
-------------
13 mallār tiṇṭōṭṭa pāñcālaṉ
piṟcērkkai : pala putiya pāṭalkaḷ
eṉṉē koṭumai!
mallār tiṇṭōṭ pāñcālaṉ
      makaḷ poṟkarattiṉ māluṟṟa
villāl vijayaṉ aṉṟiḻaitta
      vintait toḻilai maṟantilirāl
pollā vitiyāl nīviravaṉ
      pōrmuṉṉiḻaitta peruntoḻilkaḷ
ellā maṟantī remmavarkāḷ
      eṉṉē koṭumai yīṅkituvē! 1
vīmaṉ tiṟalu mavaṟkiḷaiya
      vijayaṉ tiṟalum viḷaṅkiniṉṟa
cēmamaṇippūn taṭanāṭṭil
      ciṟiya puḻukkaḷ tōṉṟi veṟuṅ
kāma nukartal irantuṇṭal
      kaṭaiyām vāḻkkai vāḻntu piṉar
īmam pukuta livaipurivār
      eṉṉē koṭumai yīṅkituvē. 2
ātāram: pārati tamiḻ -- pakkam 16
cutēcamittiraṉ: 4-4-1906
--------------
13. India's Past (4.4.1906) (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
1. Seeking the lovely golden hand of her,
The daughter of mighty shouldered Lord of Panchal,
In the past, Vijaya of the famous bow
Wrought wondrous exploits; you have these forgot.
2. You are oblivious alas, of all
The exploits great in the field of battle
He wrought, by reason of your cruel fate.
What horror of horrors is this, oh God!
3. In the jewel of a land, rich and strong
Where valour in war as displayed by Bhima
And his younger brother Arjuna, flourished, Now teem the little
detestable worms.
4. These thrive in a sensual sty; on alms
They thrive; living thus totally debased
They end up on the funeral pyre.
What horror of horrors is this, oh God!
---Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil poem appeared in Swadesamitran. Bharati has prefixed a
note to this poem, which runs thus. "Some thoughts which upsurged in our
heart on witnessing the shooting marvels of two Rajputs in the tradition
of the archety practised by Arjuna and others, celeb rated in the
ancient Puranas."
-----------------
14. eṉatu tāynāṭṭiṉ muṉṉāṭ perumaiyum innāṭ ciṟumaiyum
kaṇṇikaḷ
puṉṉakaiyu miṉṉicaiyu meṅkoḷittup pōyiṉavō
iṉṉaloṭu kaṇṇīriruppāki viṭṭaṉavē! 1
āṇelām peṇṇāy arivaiyarelām vilaṅkāy
māṇelām pāḻāki maṅkiviṭṭatin nāṭē! 2
āriyarkaḷ vāḻntuvarum aṟputanā ṭeṉpatupōyp
pūriyarkaḷ vāḻum pulaittēca māyiṉatē! 3
vīmāti vīrar viḷitteṅku pōyiṉarō!
ēmāṟi niṟku miḻiñarkaḷiṅ kuḷḷārē! 4
vētavupa niṭata meynnūlka ḷellāmpōy
pētaik kataikaḷ pitaṟṟuvarin nāṭṭiṉilē! 5
āti maṟaikkītam arivaiyarkaḷ coṉṉatupōy
vīti perukkum vilaiyaṭimai yāyiṉarē! 6
centēṉum pālum teviṭṭi niṉṟa nāṭṭiṉilē
vantē tīppañca maramāki viṭṭatuvē! 7
māmuṉivar tōṉṟi maṇamuyarnta nāṭṭiṉilē
kāmukarum poyyaṭimaik kaḷvarkaḷum cūḻntaṉarē! 8
poṉṉu maṇiyumikap poṅkiniṉṟa vinnāṭṭil
aṉṉamiṉṟi nāḷu maḻivārka ḷettaṉaipēr? 9
--------------
14. The Past Glory and the Present Debasement of
My Motherland (11-4-1906) (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
Whither are they gone -- smile and sweet music?
Troubles and tears own the country entire;
Men have women become; women animals;
All majesty is gone; this land lacks lustre.
It is no more the wondrous land of Aryas!
It is now the country base, of mean men!
Are they dead and gone -- valiant heroes? Here are only the disappointed
low!
Gone are Vedas, Upanishads, true scriptures! They but blabber here
idiotic tales!
Time was when women chanted old Vedic hymns; Today they have become
sweepers of streets.
In the sweet land where flowed milk and honey
Famine vile doth hold the sway.
In the land of seers whence wafted wisdom,
Lechers and thieves -- slaves to falsehood, -- abide.
In the land abounding in gold and gems
Very many starve and daily perish.
- Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
(To be continued)
Note: The Tamil poem appeared in Swadesamitran. The note after the poem
says that further instalments will be forthcoming. For reasons beyond
anybody's guess, the poem was not continued.
--------------
15. apētākaīnta svāmikaḷiṉ‌ mītu
stōttirak‌ kavikaḷ‌
curutiyu mariya upaniṭa tattiṉ‌
      tokutiyum‌ paḻutaṟa vuṇarktōṉ‌
curutiṭaṟ‌ kariya piramaīṉ‌ vilaiyaik‌
      kaṇṭupē roḷiyiṭaik‌ kaḷittōṉ‌
aritiṉiṟ‌ kāṇu miyalpoṭu puvili
      sappuṟat‌ tiruntuīṇ‌ pakaliṟ‌
paritimi ṉoḷiyum‌ ceṉṟiṭā nāṭṭil‌!
      meyyoḷi parappiṭac‌ ceṉṟōṉ‌. 1
vēṟu
oṉṟēmeyp‌ poruḷāku muyirkaḷelā
      mataṉvaṭivā mōruṅ‌ kālai
eṉṟēvaṉuṉṟēvaṉeṉṉulakar       pakaippatelā miḻivā meṉṟu
3ṉṟēyiv‌ kaṟivuṟuttum‌ paramakuru
      ñāṉameṉum‌ palirai īccit‌
tiṉṟēpā ḻākkiṭumaim‌ pulaṉ‌ kaḷeṉum‌
      vilaṅkiṉattaic‌ cekunta vīraṉ‌. 2
vēṟu
vāṉat‌ tampukaḻ‌ mēvi viḷaṅkiya
      māci lāti kuravaṉac‌ caṅkaraṉ‌
ñāṉak‌ taṅkumik‌ kāṭṭiṉaip‌ piṉṉaru
      kaṇṇi ṉāṉeṉt‌ tēcuṟu mavlivē
kāṉan‌ tapperuñ‌ cōti maṟaintapiṉ‌
      avaṉi ḻaitta peruntoḻi lāṟṟiyē
ūṉak‌ taṅkiya māṉiṭar‌ tītelā
      moḻikku māṟu piṟanta peruntavaṉ‌. 3
vēṟu
tūyaapē tāīnta ṉeṉumpeyarkoṇ
      ṭeraḷirtarumic‌ cutta ñāṉi
kēyamuṭa sikīkuriṟ‌ niruppātañ‌
      cārttiyaru ṇeñciṟ‌!' coṇṭu
māyamelā nīṅkiyiṉi temmavarnaṉ
      ṉeṟicārum‌ vaṇṇam‌ ñāṉam‌
tōyāṉi poḻintiṭumōr‌ mukilpōṉṟāṉ‌.
      ivaṉpataṅkaḷ‌ tutikkiṉ‌ nāmē.” 4
----------
15. To Abhedananda (4-8-1906)
1. Blameless and perfect in his knowledge
      of Veda and the rich rare Upanishads,
transfigured by the splendorous Light
      which is the Bliss of Brahman,
and endowed with gifts exceptional,
      he adventured into a land
where darkness reigns at noon
      to radiate the light of Truth.
2. The One remains,
      all living things are its shadow-forms;
'tis the surest folly
      to call Him thine or mine;
still the five senses cloud the mind
      and deny the Truth.
But you have proved their victor,
      O knight-errant of the Spirit:
3. As if great Shankara, flaming minister,
      whose fame reached up to the sky,
as if Shankara himself had returned
      to revisit this hoary land,
there came Vivekananda the shining Light
      and when it withdrew,
you came forward to make good the loss,
      and continue his healing among men.
4. Purest of saints, Abhedananda,
      the light of whose darling feet
fell upon this blessed city,
      you whose penance is like the cloud
with its promise of showers,
      cherishing in our hearts the grace of your love,
we try to pierce the veils of Maya
      and reach the altar of Truth.
- Dr. Prema Nandakumar
Note: The Tamil original appeared in India.:Bharati wrote the poem under
the pseudonym, "A Vedanti."
He has himself explained the words paritiyiṉ oḷiyum ceṉṟiṭā nāṭṭil
thus:-The American continent which is shrouded in night when our
continent is having day-light."
Swami Abhedananda, the hero of this poem, is one of the direct disci
ples of Bhagawan Sri Ramakrishna.
------------------
16. yāṉ‌
aruḷā levaiyum‌ pār‌eṉṟāṉ‌ - atai
atiyātē kaṭṭiyeṉ‌ aṟivālē pārttēṉ‌
iruḷāṉa poruḷkaṇṭa tallāl‌ - kaṇṭa
eṉṉaiyuṅ‌ kaṇṭilē ḷeṉṉaṭi tōḻi!
      - tāyumāṉavar‌
āyiraṅ‌ kōṭi aṟiñarkaḷ‌ paṟpala
āyira yukaṅka eārāym‌ taṟikilā
[yāṉ‌uṭai yiyaṟkai yāṉō aṟivaṉ‌!
mīṉuṇarm‌ tiṭuṅkol‌ viyaṉcuṭaṟ‌ perumai?
aruḷvaḻik‌ kāṇkeṉ‌ airuḷiṉar‌ periyōr‌; 5
maruḷvaḻi yallāṉ‌ maṟṟecaṉ‌ ṟuṇarkilēṉ‌!
akilamum‌ yāṉ‌'eṉa āṉṟō ricaippar‌.
makitalat‌ tiruḷiṉ‌ maṇṭiya maṉattēṉ‌
yāṉatai yorōvaḻik‌ kaṇṭuṭēṉ‌) eṉilum‌
māṉata oḷiyatu maṅkumōr‌ kaṇattē. 10
yāṉelum‌ poruḷtāṉ‌ eṉṉaikol‌? ataṉaiyaliv‌
vūṉeṉak‌ koḷva ruyirilār‌ cilarē.
piramamē! yāṉeṉap‌ pēcuvar‌ pēcuka!
piramamē? yāḷeṉap‌ pēciṉac‌ periyōr‌.
      cutēcamittiraṉ‌: 17-9-1908 .
---------------
16. 'I' 817-9-1906) (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
1. "Behold but through the eye of grace" said he;
But I took to knowledge empirical;
Then nought but murk did I see, oh my dear,
In which I could not even see my seeing self."
- Tayumanavar.
(A Sonnet)
2. If billions and billions of scholars wise
For thousands of yugas failed to know
This "I", can I its nature realise?
Can the fish know the greatness of sea, oh!
Said the great ones: "Behold through the eye of grace."
Other than my way dark, I know not aught;
"'I am everything" say the wise of human race;
Plunged in murk phenomenal, I know nought.
I have somewhat occasionally sensed this,
Yet mental light would in a moment fade.
What may this "s" be? Some dead souls, I wis,
With mere flesh equate it, I am afraid.
May they that call it "Illusion" so say;
The great call it God and the fools inveigh.
- Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original appeared in Swadesamitran.
-------------------
17. cantirikai
yāṇack‌! kuṟaiyuḷā mintumā ṭataṉiṟ‌
kāṇaṟ‌ kiṉiya kāṭcikaḷ‌ palavilu
māṇap‌ periya vaṉappamaik‌ tiṉkavi
vāṇark‌ kamutā vayaṅkiṭum‌ poruḷiteṉ‌
māṇap‌ pulavēca? vuraittuḷaṉ‌ muṉṉāḷ‌. 5
aḵtutāṉ‌.
curumaiyiṟ‌ paṭarnta vāṉamāṅ‌ kaṭaliṭai
orumaiyiṟ‌ flaw moṇmatit‌ tīviṉiṉ‌
nellāt‌ 'ticaiyiṉu meḻilpeṟa vūṟṟuñ‌
collā viṉimaikoḷ‌ cōtiyeṉ‌ nōtiṉaṉ‌. 10
ōrmuṟai|
kaṭaṟpuṟa maṇaṉmicait‌ taṉiyē kaṇṇayarn‌
tiṭaippaṭu miravi liṉitukaṇ‌ viḻittuyāṉ‌
vāṉaka kōkkiṉēṉ‌ maṟṟataṉ‌ māṇpiṉai
yūṉamā kāviṉi luraittalum‌ paṭumō 15
kiṉaivaruk‌ teyvikak‌ kaṉaviṭaik‌ kuḷittēṉ‌ vāḻimati
-- cutēcamittiraṉ‌: 86-9-1904
------------
17. Lines on the Moon (25-9-1906) (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
Among all the lovely sights to behold
In Hindustan -- the Abode of Beauty --
That which is wrought of lofty majesty
And is deemed as nectar by sweet minstrels
In the opinion of an English bard
Is that which is ineffably the sweet light
That pours beauteous in all directions
From the fair isle of moon which glows alone
In the ocean of black extensive sky.
Once I lay alone asleep on the beach
And when I woke up at the dead of night
I eyed the sky; can I its majesty
Articulate with my tongue of mere flesh?
In a dream divine that defies the thought
I bathed! May moon serene flourish for ever!
- Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original appeared in Swadesamitran.
----------------
18. ravi varmāmītu ceyyuḷ‌"
intiyā: 8-7021906
cantira ṉoḷiyai yīcaṉ‌
      camaittatu paruka veṉṟē
vantiṭu cāta kappuḷ‌
      varuttaṉaṉ‌, aḻutuṇ‌ ṭākkip‌
pantiyiṟ‌ paruka veṉṟē
      paṭaittaṉa ṉamarar‌ tammai,
intiraṉ māṇpuk keṉṉa
      iyaṟṟiṉaṉ‌ veḷiya yāṉai, 1
malariṉil‌ nīla vāṉil‌
      mātarār‌ mukattiṉ‌ ellām‌
ilakiya aḻakai yīcaṉ‌
      iyaṟṟiṉāṉ‌, cīrtti yinta
vulakiṉi leṅkum‌ vīci
      yōṅkiya iravi varmaṉ‌
alakilā aṟivuk‌ kaṇṇā
      laṉaittaiyu nukaru māṟē t‌
maṉṉarmā ḷikaiyi lēḻai
      makkaḷiṉ‌ kuṭili lellām‌
uṉṉaruk‌ tēcu vīci
      yuttiṉaik‌ kaḷikkac‌ ceyvāṉ‌
3ṉṉarō viyaṅkaḷ‌ tīṭṭi
      nalkiya perumāṉ innāṭ
poṉṉaṇi yulaku ceṉṟāṉ‌
      puvippukaḻ‌ pōtu meṉpāṉ‌. 3
arampaiyūr‌ vacipō luḷḷa
      amaramel‌ liyalār‌ cevvi
tirampaṭa varutta vemmāṉ‌!
      ceytoḻi loppu nōkka
virumpiyē kollā miṉṟu
      viṇṇula kaṭaintu viṭṭāy‌?
arampaiyar‌ niṉkaic‌ ceykaik‌
      kaḻitalaṅ‌ kaṟivai tiṇṇam‌. 4
kālavāṉ‌ pōkki leṉṟuy‌
      kaḻikilāp‌ perumai koṇṭa
kōlavāṉ‌ ṟoḻilkaḷ‌ ceytu
      kulaviya periyōr‌ tāḻum‌
cīlavāḻ‌ vakaṟṟi yōrkāṭ‌
      cettiṭa luṟuti yāyiṉ‌
ñālavāḻ‌ viṉatu māya
      naviṉṟiṭaṟ‌ kariya taṉṟō? 5
-----------
18. On Ravi Varma (6-10-1906) (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
1. The Lord God created the rays of the moon
To serve as food for the Chakor; He made
Nectar the food of the celestials
And the tusker white for Indra to ride.
2. In blossoms, in blue sky, and visages
Of women, God deigned to create beauty
That the world-renowned Ravi Varma might
Relish them with his eye of endless wisdom.
3. Glowing with inconceivable lustre
His pictures which adorn mansions and huts
Delight all hearts; gone is he to the heaven
Deeming it enough, his glory on earth.
4. Rambha, Urvasi and dames heavenly
Breathed alive on his canvas; to compare
His copies with originals, he is gone.
The dames divine are bound to wilt in shame.
5. If even great men whose divine works of beauty
That will with everlasting glory endure
Should aye, one day quit their glorious life,
What are we to say of world's Mayic nature?
- Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original appeared in India.
----------------
19. jayajaya pavāṉi jayajaya pāratam!!
catrapati civāji
(civāji taṉ caiṉiyattiṟkuk kūṟiyatu)
58. jayajaya pavāṉi! jayajaya pāratam!
jayajaya mātā! jayajaya turkkā!
vantē mātaram! vantē mātaram!
cēṉait talaivarkāḷ! ciṟanta mantirikāḷ!
yāṉait talaivarum aruntiṟal vīrarkāḷ! 5
atirata maṉarkāḷ! turakat tatiparkāḷ
etirikaḷ tuṇukkuṟa iṭittiṭu patātikāḷ!
vēleṟi paṭaikāḷ! cūleṟi maṟavarkāḷ!
kāla ṉurukkoḷum kaṇaituran tiṭuvīr.
maṟṟumā yiravitam paṟṟalar tammaic 10
ceṟṟiṭun tiṟaṉuṭait tīrarat tiṉaṅkāḷ!
yāvirum vāḻiya! yāvirum vāḻiya!
tēvinun tamakkelām tiruvaruḷ purika!
māṟṟalar tampulai nāṟṟamē yaṟiyā
āṟṟalkoṇ ṭiruntatil varumpukaḻ nāṭu! 15
vētanūl paḻikkum veḷitticai milēccar
pātamum poṟuppaḷō pārata tēvi?
vīrarum avaricai virittiṭu pulavarum
pārelām perumpukaḻ parappiya nāṭu!
tarmamē uruvamāt taḻaittapē raracarum 20
nirmala muṉivarum niṟanta naṉ ṉāṭu!
vīraraip peṟāta mēṉmainīr maṅkaiyai
ūravar malaṭiyeṉ ṟuraittiṭu nāṭu!
pāratap pūmi paḻamperum pūmi;
nīrataṉ putalvar, in niṉaivakaṟ ṟātīr! 25
pārata nāṭu pārkkelām tilakam;
nīrataṉ putalvar, in niṉaivakaṟ ṟātīr!
vāṉaka muṭṭum imayamāl varaiyum 30
ēṉaiya ticaikaḷil iruntiraik kaṭalum
kāttiṭu nāṭu! kaṅkaiyum cintuvum
tūttirai yamuṉaiyum cuṉaikaḷum puṉalkaḷum
iṉṉarum poḻilkaḷum iṇaiyilā vaḷaṅkaḷum
uṉṉata malaikaḷum oḷirtaru nāṭu! 35
painniṟap paḻaṉam paciyilā taḷikka
mainniṟa mukilkaḷ vaḻaṅkum poṉṉāṭu!
tēvarkaḷ vāḻviṭam, tiṟaluyar muṉivar
āvalō ṭaṭaiyum arumpukaḻ nāṭu!
ūṉamoṉ ṟaṟiyā ñāṉamey pūmi, 40
vāṉavar viḻaiyum māṭciyār tēyam!
pārata nāṭṭicai pakarayāṉ vallaṉō?
nīrataṉ putalvar niṉaivakaṟ ṟātīr!
tāyttiru nāṭṭait taṟukaṇ milēccar
pēyttakai koṇṭōr perumaiyum vaṉmaiyum 45
ñāṉamum aṟiyā navaipuri pakaivar
vāṉakam aṭakka vantiṭum arakkar pōl
innāḷ paṭai koṇarntu iṉṉalcey kiṉṟār!
ālayam aḻittalum arumaṟai paḻittalum
pālarai viruttaraip pacukkaḷai oḻittalum 50
mātarkaṟ paḻittalum maṟaivar vēḷvikku
ētamē cūḻvatum iyaṟṟiniṟ kiṉṟār!
cāttirat tokutiyait tāḻttivaik kiṉṟār
kōttira maṅkaiyar kulaṅkeṭuk kiṉṟār
eṇṇila tuṇaivarkāḷ! emakkivar ceyuntuyar 55
kaṇṇiyam maṟuttaṉar, āṇmaiyuṅ kaṭintaṉar,
poruḷiṉaic citaittaṉar, maruḷiṉai vitaittaṉar
tiṇmaiyai yaḻittup peṇmaiyiṅ kaḷittaṉar,
pāratap perumpeyar paḻippeya rākkiṉar,
cūrartam makkaḷait toḻumparāyp purintaṉar, 60
vīriyam aḻintu mēṉmaiyum oḻintu nam
āriyar pulaiyaruk kaṭimaika ḷāyiṉar.
maṟṟitaip poṟuttu vāḻvatō vāḻkkai
veṟṟikoḷ pulaiyartāḷ vīḻntukol vāḻvīr?
mokkukaḷtāṉ tōṉṟi muṭivatu pōla 65
makkaḷāyp piṟantōr maṭivatu tiṇṇam.
tāyttiru nāṭṭait takarttiṭu milēccarai
māyttiṭa virumpāṉ vāḻvumōr vāḻvukol?
māṉamoṉ ṟilātu māṟṟalar toḻumparāy
īṉamuṟ ṟirukka evaṉkolō virumpuvaṉ? 70
tāypiṟaṉ kaippaṭac cakippava ṉāki
nāyeṉa vāḻvōṉ namariliṅ kuḷaṉō?
piccaivāḻ vukantu piṟaruṭaiya yāṭciyil
accamuṟ ṟiruppōṉ āriya ṉallaṉ,
puṉpulāl vāḻkkaiyaip pōṟṟiyē tāynāṭṭu 75
aṉpilā tiruppōṉ āriya ṉallaṉ.
māṭcitīr milēccar maṉappaṭi yāḷum
āṭciyi laṭaṅkuvōṉ āriya ṉallaṉ.
āriyat taṉmai aṟṟiṭuñ ciṟiyar
yārivaṇ uḷaravar yāṇṭēṉum oḻika! 80
paṭaimukattu iṟantu patampeṟa virumpāk
kaṭaipaṭu mākkaḷeṉ kaṇmuṉil lātīr!
cōtarar tammait turōkikaḷ aḻippa
mātarar nalattiṉ makiḻpavaṉ makiḻka,
nāṭelām piṟarvacam naṇṇutal niṉaiyāṉ 85
vīṭuceṉ ṟoḷikka virumpuvōṉ virumpuka!
tēcamē nalivoṭu tēyntiṭa makkaḷiṉ
pācamē periteṉap pārppavaṉ celka!
nāṭṭuḷār paciyiṉāl nalintiṭat taṉvayiṟu
ūṭṭutal periteṉa uṉṉuvōṉ celka! 90
āṇuruk koṇṭa peṇkaḷum alikaḷum
vīṇiliṅ kirunteṉai veṟuttiṭal virumpēṉ.
āriyar irumiṉ! āṇkaḷiṅku irumiṉ!
vīriyam mikunta mēṉmaiyōr irumiṉ!
māṉamē periteṉa matippavar irumiṉ! 95
īṉamē poṟāta iyalpiṉar irumiṉ!
tāynāṭ ṭaṉpuṟu taṉaiyar iṅku irumiṉ!
māynāṭ perumaiyiṉ māypavar irumiṉ!
pulaiyartam toḻumpaip poṟukkilār irumiṉ!
kalaiyaṟu milēccaraik kaṭipavar irumiṉ! 100
ūravar tuyarilneñ curukuvīr irumiṉ!
cōra neñcilāt tūyavar irumiṉ!
tēvitāḷ paṇiyun tīrar iṅku irumiṉ!
pāviyar kurutiyaip parukuvār irumiṉ!
uṭaliṉaip pōṟṟā uttamar irumiṉ! 105
kaṭalmaṭup piṉummaṉam kalaṅkalar utavumiṉ!
vammiṉō tuṇaivīr? maruṭcikoḷ ḷātīr!
nammiṉō rāṟṟalai nāḻikaip poḻuteṉum
pulliya māṟṟalar poṟukkaval lārkol?
melliya tiruvaṭi vīṟuṭait tēviyiṉ 110
iṉṉaruḷ namakkōr iruntuṇai yākum
paṉṉarum pukaḻuṭaip pārttaṉum kaṇṇaṉum
vīmaṉum turōṇaṉum vīṭṭumaṉ ṟāṉum
rāmaṉum vēṟuḷa iruntiṟal vīrarum
naṟṟuṇai purivar; vāṉaka, nāṭuṟum! 115
veṟṟiyē yaṉṟi vēṟetum peṟukilēm!
paṟṟaṟu muṉivarum ācikaḷ pakarvar
ceṟṟiṉi milēccarait tīrttiṭa vammīṉ!
īṭṭiyāṟ ciraṅkaḷai vīṭṭiṭa eḻumiṉ!
nīṭṭiya vēlkaḷai nēriruntu eṟimiṉ! 120
vāḷuṭai muṉaiyiṉum vayantikaḻ cūliṉum,
āḷuṭaik kālka ḷaṭiyiṉun tērkaḷiṉ
uruḷaiyi ṉiṭaiyiṉum māṟṟalar talaikaḷ
uruḷaiyiṟ kaṇṭuneñ cuvappuṟa vammiṉ!
namitam, peruvaḷam nalintiṭa virumpum
(vaṉmiyai) vēraṟat tolaittapiṉ ṉaṉṟō
āṇeṉap peṟuvōm, aṉṟinām iṟappiṉum
vāṉuṟu tēvar maṇiyula kaṭaivōm,
vāḻvamēṟ pārata vāṉpukaḻt tēviyait
tāḻviṉiṉ ṟuyarttiya taṭampukaḻ peṟuvōm! 130
pōreṉil itupōr, puṇṇiyat tiruppōr!
pāriṉil itupōṟ pārttiṭaṟ keḷitō?
āṭṭiṉaik koṉṟu vēḷvikaḷ iyaṟṟi
vīṭṭiṉaip peṟuvāṉ virumpuvār cilarē
neñcakak kurutiyai nilattiṭai vaṭittu
vañcaka maḻikkum māmakam purivamyām
vēḷviyilitupōl vēḷviyoṉ ṟillai!
tavattiṉil itupōl tavampiṟi tillai!
muṉṉaiyōr pārttaṉ muṉaitticai niṉṟu
taṉṉetir niṉṟa taḷattiṉai nōkkiṭa 140
mātular cōtarar maittuṉar tātaiyar
kātaliṉ naṇpar kalaitaru kuravareṉṟu
iṉṉavar iruttalkaṇṭu, itayamnon tōṉāyt
taṉṉarun teyvikac cārati muṉṉar
aiyaṉē! ivarmī tampaiyō toṭuppēṉ?
vaiyakat taracum vāṉaka āṭciyum
pōyiṉum ivartamaip pōriṉil vīḻttēṉ.
meyyiṉil naṭukkam mēvukiṉ ṟatuvāl,
kaiyiṉil villum kaḻaṉṟuvīḻ kiṉṟatu. 150
vāyular kiṉṟatu; maṉam pataikkiṉṟatu,
ōyvuṟuṅ kālkaḷ, ulaintatu ciramum,
veṟṟiyai virumpēṉ, mēṉmaiyai virumpēṉ
cuṟṟamiṅ kaṟuttuc cukampeṟal virumpēṉ,
eṉaiyivar kolliṉum ivaraiyāṉ tīṇṭēṉ,
ciṉaiyaṟut tiṭṭapiṉ ceyvatō āṭci?
eṉappala kūṟiyav vintiraṉ putalvaṉ
kaṉappaṭai villaik kaḷattiṉil eṟintu
cōrvōṭu vīḻntaṉaṉ, curutiyiṉ muṭivāyt
tērvayiṉ niṉṟanam teyvikap perumāṉ 160
villeṟin tirunta vīraṉai nōkki
pulliya aṟivoṭu pulampukiṉ ṟaṉaiyāl
aṟattiṉaip pirinta cuyōtaṉā tiyaraic
ceṟuttiṉi māyppatu tīmaiyeṉ kiṉṟāy,
uṇmaiyai aṟiyāy uṟavaiyē karutip
peṇmaikoṇ ṭētō pitaṟṟiniṟ kiṉṟāy
vañcakar, tīyar, maṉitarai varuttuvōr,
neñcakat tarukkuṭai nīcarkaḷ; iṉṉōr
tammoṭu piṟanta cakōtararāyiṉum
vemmaiyō ṭoṟuttal vīrartañ ceyalām. 170
āriya nītinī aṟikilai pōlum!
pūriyar pōlmaṉam puḻuṅkuṟa lāyiṉai
arumpukaḻ tēyppatum aṉāriyat takaittum
perumpatat taṭaiyumām peṇmaiyeṅ keytiṉai?
pēṭimai yakaṟṟu! niṉ perumaiyai maṟantiṭēl!
īṭilāp pukaḻiṉāy! eḻukavō eḻuka! eṉṟu
meyñ ñāṉamnam iṟaiyavar kūṟak
kuṉṟeṉum vayirak koṟṟavāṉ puyattōṉ
aṟamē periteṉa aṟintiṭu maṉattaṉāy
maṟamē uruvuṭai māṟṟalar tammaic 180
cuṟṟamum nōkkāṉ tōḻamai matiyāṉ
paṟṟalar tamaiyelām pārkkirai yākkiṉaṉ.
vicayaṉaṉ ṟirunta viyaṉpukaḻ nāṭṭil
icaiyunaṟ ṟavattāl iṉṟuvāḻn tirukkum
āriya vīrarkāḷ! avaruṭai māṟṟalar,
tērilin nāṭṭiṉar, ceṟivuṭai uṟaviṉar,
nammaiyiṉ ṟetirkkum nayaṉilāp pullōr,
cemmaitīr milēccar, tēcamum piṟitām
piṟappiṉil aṉṉiyar, pēcciṉil aṉṉiyar
ciṟappuṭai yāriyac cīrmaiyai aṟiyār. 190
----------------
19. Chatrapati Shivaji's Address to His Warriors
(17-1-1906, 25-11-1906, 1-12-1906, 8-12-1906 - India) (Thiru
T.N.Ramachandran )
Hail, hail Bhavani! Hail, all hail Bharat
Hail, all hail Mother! Hail, all hail Durga!
Vande Mataram!Praise be to Mother!
Commanders of armies! Ministers great!
Leaders of elephantry! Heroes great!
Atirata Kings! Leaders of cavalry!
Footmen who smite and dumbfound enemies!
Wielders of spears and throwers of javelins!
Unleash your darts that are death incarnate!
Gems of valour that in myriad ways
Can rout the hostile hosts and smite them all!
May you all flourish! May you all flourish!
May Devi great, grant you grace divine!
This is the famous nation that suffered not
The stinking odour of enemies base!
Will Bharat-Devi brook the unblest feet
Of Barbarians --revilers of Veda?
This is the nation whence wafted to the world
The fame of heroes through minstrels matchless!
This is the nation where flourished mighty kings
And saints blemishless, dharma incarnate!
This nation dubbed the ignoble woman
Who bore not heroes, as nullipara!
'Ancient is Bharat and you her children'!
Forget not; 'Bharat is the tilak of earth:
You her children'; forsake not this thought.
Bharat is the deity of the whcle world;
You are her children; forsake not this thought.
On the north, sky-piercing Himachal
And on other sides the great seas, protect her.
Ganga, Sindhu, Jamna of pure billows,
Spas, Waters, rare gardens sweet, fertile fields
Peerless, and lofty mountains here abound!
That ever-green fields may stave off hunger
The pitch dark rainclouds for ever pour here!
Divine home of angels! Glorious land
Eagerly sought by the holy Munis!
No imperfection mars this Land of Wisdom!
Majestic land by celestials sought!
Is Bharat's glory by me effable?
You are her children, never forget this.
Ruthless barbarians, men demon-like,
Enemies dead to glory, hardihood
And knowledge, doers of evil, the Turks,
Like Asuras that came to war against
The realms of heaven, have come with armies
And cause endless woes to our Motherland.
Temples and scriptures sacred, they defame;
Infants, people old and kine they destroy;
Women they rape and do acts that undo
The performance of holy sacrifices.
They set fire to the works-- holy scriptures;
They violate women of good families;
Friends! Countless are the miseries they cause;
They abjure dignity and men unman;
Wealth they lay waste and sow seeds of darkness;
Quelling firmness, they make women of us;
The great name of Bharat they stigmatise;
They make slaves of them -- the sons of heroes.
Shorn of valiancy and loftiness,
Lo, our Aryas became slaves of the base!
Can that be life at all, which endures this?
Like a bubble now born and burst anon
To thrive, will you fall at the feet of the base?
Men that are born on earth, are bound to die.
Call you theirs a life, who seek not to quell
The vile aliens that blast our Motherland?
Will ever men shed their honour and consent
To live base, as slaves of barbarians?
Is there amidst us any, living dog-like
When his dear mother is by aliens held?
Under alien rule, a willing beggar
He lives fear-ridden; he is not an Arya!
He that fosters his body vile with nought
Of love for Motherland, is not an Arya!
He that suffers the capricious reign
Ignoble, of aliens, is not an Arya!
If any be here--small ones and un-Aryan--,
They many go whithersoever they like!
They that desire not death and Valhalla,
May those then flee from the ken of my sight'
When brothers are by Turks destroyed, he that
Dailies with women, may in joy revel!
He does not think of alien tyranny;
He will hide in his house; lét him seek hiding!
Dead to the languishing nation he thinks
But of his sons and daughters, let him go!
When his countrymen starve, he thinks it great
To feed and fill his maw, let him away!
I'll not suffer their presence and hatred,
Mere eunuchs and women in men's disguise!
May Aryas stay here! May men remain here!
May the heroic and the lofty, stay here!
May they to whom honour is all, stay here!
May they who cannot meanness brook, stay here!
May sons of ceaseless love for Motherland, stay here!
May they who die when dies glory, stay here!
May they who hate slavery base, stay here!
Haters of barbaric culture, stay here!
Those who melt for woes of others, stay here!
The undeceitful and the pure, stay here!
Heroes who Devi's feet adore, stay here!
May the quaffers of sinners' blood stay here!
Lovers of spirit--not body --help us!
They that are fearless when even the sea overflows, help us!
Can they-four feeble enemies --, withstand
Our puissance great, for even a bare hour?
The grace of the heroic Devi's soft feet
Will be for us, help sure and unfailing.
May you come friends, Do not feel bewildered.
Ineffably glorious Arjuna,
Karna, Bhima, Drona, Bhishma, Rama
And other heroes of rare valour great
Will aid us; we will the Heaven attain;
Nought but sure victory, our lot will be.
Unselfish saints will shower benedictions.
Come, do away with the barbarians!
With spear, decapitate the heads of foes;
Stand firm and unleash your deadly javelins;
At the sword-tip and that of the dread trident,
At soldiers' feet and down the chariots
And at the wheels thereof, when heads of foes
Roll and roll, come ye to joy at the sight!
We shall be deemed men, only when we pull down
Root and branch our foes, who are out to weaken
Our weal and welfare great; if in this war
We die, it is elysium we come by.
If we live thus, the everlasting fame
Of securing for Devi supernal
Her due place of glory divine, shall be ours.
Is it easy on earth to behold a war
Like unto this, so holy and divine?
A few desire the Heaven to attain
By sacrificing goats in the yaga.
Well, let us perform the great sacrifice
By shedding blood and killing deception.
There is no sacrifice to match this one;
There is no tapas to equal this one.
Of yore, Arjuna stood on the battle-front
And when he saw before him in that field,
Uncles, brothers, brothers-in-law, and men
Like unto father and god-father too,
Loving friends and gurus, his heart melted;
Thus spake he to his godly charioteer:
"O Lord, will I pierce these with my arrows?
Even if I over earth and heaven
Lose lordship, I will not slay them in war;
Will I ever kill them that are dearer than mother?
My body is atremble; mine own bow
From my hand doth slip; my tongue has gone dry;
My mind is sore agitated; my legs
Grow limp; my head swims; triumph I seek not;
Nor greatness, nor weal, killing kith and kin;
Even if they kill me, I will not harm them;
It is no reign when extinction is total."
Thus spake Indra's son and threw on the field
His mighty bow, and down he fell dispirited.
Our God of Vedas that stood near the car
Thys addressed the brave bowman, now bowless:
"You but blabber with your brain grown addied.
You call it a sin, to kill them, the gang
Of Suyodhana, from dharma remote;
Truth you know not; valuing much, kinship
And grown womanly, you drool and gibber.
Traitors, evil ones, they that harass men,
And the arrogant base-- though these may be
Their brothers --, it behoves heroes true,
To punish them all in severity.
You know not perhaps aryan justice;
Like the vile wicked, you feel sore at heart.
You've grown womanly; this is un-Aryan
And inglorious and will annul weal.
Conquer effeminacy; forget not,
Peerless prince of fame, your greatness; arise!"
When the Lord God taught him knowledge true,
He whose shoulder was strong as diamond
With a mind glowing with supreme harma,
Ignoring sibship and companionship,
Smote the foes, embodiments of evil,
And scattered their corpses as prey on earth.
Aryan heroes who are blessed to live
This day, in the glorious country great
Where famed Vijaya flourished of yore,
Know that your countrymen are your close kin;
The evil base that this day, oppose us
Are vile barbarians and foreigners;
They are aliens by birth and language too;
They know not the glory of Aryas great
(To be continued)
- Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original was serialised in India. Bharati desired to
conti
nue the work with intent to produce a poem of outstanding historical
eminence surcharged with patriotism. He therefore thought that his
desire could be better served by the production of a book in this
connection. He even announced that such a book would be forthcoming.
However he was unable to implement his promise. Bharati's note to this
poem makes it clear that some of the, remarks on Muslims should not be
misunderstood by them. The remarks should be contrued in the light of
vira rasa.
----------------
20. cupparāma tīṭcitar
akaval
kavitaiyum aruñcuvaik kāṉa nūlum
puviyiṉar viyakkum ōviyap poṟpum
maṟṟuḷa peruntoḻil vakaikaḷiṟ palavum
veṟṟikoṇ ṭilaṅkiya mēṉmaiyār parata
nāṭṭiṉil innāḷ aṉṉiyar nalippa.
īṭṭiya celvam iṟantamai yāṉaṉum
āṇṭakai yoṭupukaḻ aḻintamai yāṉum
māṇṭaṉa paḻampevaru māṭciyār toḻilelām;
tēvarkaḷ vāḻnta cīrvaḷar pūmiyil
mēviya kurakkar viḷaṅkutal pōla.
nērilāp periyōr nilaviya nāṭṭil
cīrilāp pullar ceṟintuniṟ kiṉṟār;
ivariṭai
curattiṭai iṉṉīrc cuṉaiyatu pōṉṟum,
arakkartaṅ kulattiṭai vīṭaṇa ṉākavum,
cēṟṟiṭait tāmaraic cemmalar pōṉṟum,
pōṟṟataṟ kuriya puṉitavāṉ kulattil
nārata muṉivaṉ namarmicai yaraḷāl
pārata nāṭṭil paḻamāṇ puṟukeṉa
mīṭṭumōr muṟaiivaṉ mēviṉaṉ eṉṉa,
nāṭṭunaṟ cīrtti nalaṉuyar perumāṉ
tōmaṟu cuppa rāmaṉaṟ peyarōṉ
nāmakaḷ puḷakuṟa nammiṭai vāḻntāṉ
iṉṉāṉ tāṉum emaiyakaṉ ṟēkiṉaṉ;
eṉṉē nammavar iyaṟṟiya pāvam!
iṉiyiva ṉaṉaiyarai ennāṭ kāṇpōm?
kaṉiyaṟu marameṉak kaṭainilai yuṟṟōm
antō maṟalinam amuṉaik kavarntāṉ!
nontō payaṉilai nuvala yā tuḷatē?
----------------
20. On Sri Subbarama Dikshitar -- An Elegy (1-12-1906) (Thiru
T.N.Ramachandran )
Poesy, works of excellence and taste,
The graceful art of painting -- the wonder
Of the world --, great enterprises many:
In lofty Bharat which in these excelled,
These languish by alien tyranny.
As wealth garnered and manly valour are
Now dead, gone are the great enterprises,
Which flourished well of yore, in great glory;
In the famous land of holy angels,
In the land where great and peerless men thrived
Like usur ping monkeys, infamous men
Vile and mean, throng everywhere.
While so, Like an oasis sweet, midst the desert,
Like Vibhishana midst Asuric tribe,
Like a blossom of lotus in mire,
In the revered heavenly family,
To restore Bharat's ancient majesty
Like the second coming of saint Narad,
Who in grace deigned to dwell with us in sooth,
He -- the ever-sublime lord glorious,
Taintless Subba Rama --, came to be born
And here throve to the delight of Vani.
Lo, even he from us has departed;
Great is the sin our men have wrought, alas!
When shall ever come such another man?
Like a fruitless tree sere, we stand debased.
Of what avail is sorrow? What is there to say?
"Munificence great with Karna ended;
With Kamban great, poesy did perish;
With glorious Arjun beyond compare,
Died heroism" say the men of learning.
With the death of Subbha Rama divine,
The peerless Master, enshrined in my heart,
Fecund music with all its excellence Is gone for ever, alas! Sad to
tell!
Oh Lamp of Art! Oh Lamp set on hill-top
To shed light bright on llacai village!
Oh Lamp of wisdom everlasting to chase
Away the inner murk of men like us!
Devi-Muse from yourself rent asunder
Will languish like the dying flame of wick
Totally drained of its oil, alas!
The sorrow of your parting, exceeds words.
I haił not kings, nor do I ever hail
The pseudo-leaders of religious sects.
Your glory is paralleled by yours alone;
I came bowing when I beheld you.
I came to you deeming your words divine.
Alas, woe is me! If again I should
To llacai come, how sore would it be --
The suffering true of my humble heart!
-Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original appeared in India. dated 1-12-1906. It is said
that it had earlier appeared in Swadesamitran dated 26-11-1906.
The poem is an elegy written in honour of Subbha Rama Dikshitar son of
Balaswami Dikshitar. Balaswami was the younger brother of the famous
Mutthuswami Dikshitar who along with Shyama Sastri and Thiaga Brahmam
formed the trinity of the South Indian Classical Music.
------------------
vantē mātaram - jaya
21. vantē mātaram - jaya
pallavi
vantē mātaram. 1
aṉupallavi
vantē mātaram vantē mātaram
vantē mātaram vantē mātaram vantē mātaram 2
caraṇaṅkaḷ
āriya pūmiyil nāriya rum nara
cūriya rumcolum vīriya vācakam (vantē) 3
nontē pōyiṉum ventē māyiṉum
nantē cattaru vantē colvatu (vantē) 4
oṉṟāy niṉṟiṉi veṉṟā yiṉumuyir
ceṉṟā yiṉumvali kuṉṟā tōtuvam. (vantē) 5
cōtarar kāḷṉiṟai mātarir yāvaruma
ātara voṭupala tītaṟ vōtuvam (vantē) 6
tāyē, pārat nīyē vāḻiya,
nīyē caraṇiṉi nīyē yematuyir (vantē) 7
jayajaya pārata jayajaya pārata
jayajaya pārata jayajaya jayajaya (vantē)
-------------
21. Vande Mataram -- Hail (19-1-1907) (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
1. Vande Mataram, Vande Mataram,
Vande Mataram, Vande Mataram, Vande Mataram!
2. In Arya-land men and women
Invoke this brave mantra: Amen. Vande Mataram...
3. In distress and singeing pain
Our countrymen affirm this fain. Vande Mataram...
4. In triumph or death, -- united
We exhort, unabated Vande Mataram...
5. O brothers and all chaste women
With love and without flaw we'll chant Vande Mataram...
6. Mother Bharat, may you flourish!
You are our refuge and our life! Vande Mataram...
7. Jaya Jaya Bharat! Jaya Jaya Bharat!
Jaya Jaya Bharat! Jaya Jaya, Jaya Jaya! Vande Mataram...
- Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The translation here, given follows the Tamil original as
published
in India. Bharati later revised this poem, deleted stanzas 4 and 5,
numbered stanza 6 as stanza 1 and also slightly altered the pallavi and
anupallavi. It is in this revised form this poem appears in Swadesa
Gitankal -- 1908.
--------------
22. vāḻiya centamiḻ vāḻka naṟ ṟamiḻar,
putu varuṣam
vāḻiya centamiḻ! vāḻkanaṟ ṟamiḻar!
vāḻiya pārata maṇittiru nāṭu!
iṉṟemai varuttum iṉṉalkaḷ māyka!
naṉmaivan teytuka! tītelām nalika
aṟamvaḷarn tiṭuka! maṟammaṭi vuṟuka!
āriya nāṭṭiṉar āṇmaiyō ṭiyaṟṟum
cīriya muyaṟcikaḷ ciṟantumik kōṅkuka!
nantē yattiṉar nāṭoṟum uyarka!
vantē mātaram! vantē mātaram!
-------------
22. May Tamil Flourish For Ever (20-4-1907) (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
1. May Tamil great and Tamils good flourish!
May Bharat great, a gem divine flourish!
May ills that this day torture us, perish!
May good things reach us; may all evils die!
May dharına flourish, adharma perishi!
May manly deeds of this noble nation
And great efforts grow lofty and flourish!
May our countrymen grow from strength to strength!
Vande Mataram: Vande Mataram!
- Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original appeared in India on 20-4-1907. It was
republished
in India on 16-10-1909. The title given to this poem by Bharati is: "The
New year".
------------------
23. vantē mātara meṉpōm - eṅkaḷ
pallavi
vantē mātaram eṉpōm-eṅkaḷ
mānilat tāyai vaṇaṅkutal eṉpōm. (vantē)
caraṇaṅkaḷ
jāti mataṅkaḷaip pārōm- uyar
jaṉmamit tēcattil eytiṉa rāyiṉ
vētiya rāyiṉum oṉṟē- aṉṟi
vēṟu kulattiṉa rāyiṉum oṉṟē (vantē) 1
īṉap paṟaiyarka ḷēṉum-avar
emmuṭaṉ vāḻntiṅ kiruppavar aṉṟō?
cīṉatta rāyviṭu vārō?-piṟa
tēcattar pōṟpala tīṅkiḻaip pārō? (vantē) 2
āyiram uṇṭiṅku jāti-eṉil
aṉṉiyar vantu pukaleṉṉa nīti?-ōr
tāyiṉ vayiṟṟil piṟantōr-tammuḷ
caṇṭaiceytālum cakōtarar aṉṟō? (vantē) 3
oṉṟupaṭṭāl uṇṭu vāḻvē-nammil
oṟṟumai nīṅkil aṉaivarkkum tāḻvē
naṉṟitu tērntiṭal vēṇṭum-inta
ñāṉam vantāṟpiṉ namakketu vēṇṭum? (vantē) 4
eppatam vāyttiṭu mēṉum-nammil
yāvarkkum anta nilaipotu vākum
muppatu kōṭiyum vāḻvōm- vīḻil
muppatu kōṭi muḻumaiyum vīḻvōm (vantē) 5
pullaṭi maittoḻil pēṇip-paṇṭu
pōyiṉa nāṭkaḷuk kiṉimaṉam nāṇit
tollai ikaḻccikaḷ tīra- intat
toṇṭu nilaimaiyait tūveṉṟu taḷḷi (vantē) 6
------------
23. Vande Mataram (18-5-1907)
1. "Vande Mataram" we will sing!
These words throughout our land shall ring!
"Vande Mataram" we will say!
Motherland, hail! To you we pray.
2. No more talk of caste and creed,
No more talk of birth and breed;
Who first drew breath in this our land,
Brahmin or other caste, with us he will stand.
3. What if an outcaste? Does he not live
With us right here and his labour give?
Has he become a Chinese man
And will harm us the way an alien can?
4. A thousand castes we have, oh dear!
But outsiders have no place here. .
However they quarrel, can the sons of one mother
Cease to be brothers of one another?
5. Only united, true life we attain;
Divided go down, and none of us gain;
This is the lesson we all have to heed;
Once we know this, what else do we need?
6. Whatever fruits our efforts will bear
All of us equally in them will share;
For all thirty crores of us there shall be life,
Or for all thirty crores of us death after strife!
7. A pittance we preferred as serfs in a cottage
Forsaking our birthright for a mess of pottage;
This scandal and shame we have got to erase,
Spit on it, spurn it, and end the disgrace!
- Prof. P.S.Sundaram
Note: The translation here given follows the Tamil original as published
in India. Bharati revised this later. Stanza 6 was substituted by the
following stanza when Bharati published in 1907, the pamphlet entitled
Swadesa Gitankal.
(6) "Our Bharat-Devi 'll quell all our evils
And confer oni us boundless grace benign;
Unto the golden feet of the Mother Dedicate body, life and possessions."
Ii should also be mentioned here that Bharati restored the original
version, later.
-------------
24. naṭippu cutēcikaḷ
(paḻittaṟivuṟuttal)
kiḷikkaṇṇikaḷ
neñcil uramumiṉṟi
      nērmait tiṟamu miṉṟi,
vañcaṉai colvā raṭī! - kiḷiyē!
      vāyc collil vīraraṭi. 1
kūṭṭattil kūṭiniṉṟu
      kūvip pitaṟṟa laṉṟi,
nāṭṭattil koḷḷā raṭī! - kiḷiyē!
      nāḷil maṟappā raṭī 2
conta aracumpuvic
      cukaṅkaḷum māṇpu kaḷum
antakark kuṇṭāku mō? - kiḷiyē!
      akalikaḷuk kiṉpa muṇṭō ? 3
kaṇkaḷ iraṇṭiruntum
      kāṇun tiṟamai yaṟṟa
peṇkaḷiṉ kūṭṭamaṭī! - kiḷiyē!
      pēcip payaṉeṉ ṉaṭī 4
yantira cālai yeṉpār
      eṅkaḷ tuṇikaḷeṉpār,
mantirat tālē yeṅkum - kiḷiyē!
      māṅkaṉi vīḻva tuṇṭō ! 5
uppeṉṟum cīṉi eṉṟum
      uḷnāṭṭuc cēlai eṉṟum
ceppit tirivā raṭī! - kiḷiyē!
      ceyva taṟiyā raṭī! 6
tēviyar māṉam eṉṟum
      teyvattiṉ pakti eṉṟum
nāviṉāṟ colva tallāl - kiḷiyē!
      namputa laṟṟā raṭī! 7
mātaraik kaṟpaḻittu
      vaṉkaṇmai piṟar ceyyap
pētaikaḷ pōlu yiraik - kiḷiyē
      pēṇi yiruntā raṭī! 8
tēvi kōyiliṟ ceṉṟu
      tīmai piṟarkaḷ ceyya
āvi periteṉ ṟeṇṇik - kiḷiyē
      añcik kiṭantā raṭī! 9
accamum pēṭi maiyum
      aṭimaic ciṟu matiyum
uccattiṟ koṇṭā raṭīsrī - kiḷiyē
      ūmaic caṉaṅka ḷaṭī! 10
ūkkamum uḷvaliyum
      uṇmaiyiṟ paṟṟu millā
mākkaḷuk kōr kaṇamum - kiḷiyē
      vāḻat takuti yuṇṭō ? 11
māṉam ciṟiteṉ ṟeṇṇi vāḻvu
      periteṉ ṟeṇṇum
īṉark kulakan taṉil - kiḷiyē!
      irukka nilaimai yuṇṭō ? 12
cintaiyiṟ kaḷvirumpic
      civaciva veṉpatu pōl
vantē mātara meṉpār! - kiḷiyē!
      maṉatti lataṉaik koḷḷār 13
paḻamai paḻamai yeṉṟu
      pāvaṉai pēca laṉṟip
paḻamai irunta nilai! - kiḷiyē!
      pāmara rētaṟi vār! 14
nāṭṭil avamatippum
      nāṇiṉṟi iḻi celvat
tēṭṭil viruppuṅ koṇṭē! - kiḷiyē!
      ciṟumai yaṭaivā raṭī! 15
conta cakō tararkaḷ
      tuṉpattiṟ cātal kaṇṭum
cintai iraṅkā raṭī! - kiḷiyē!
      cemmai maṟantā raṭī! 16
pañcattum nōyka ḷilum
      pāratar puḻukkaḷ pōl
tuñcattum kaṇṇāṟ kaṇṭum - kiḷiyē!
      cōmpik kiṭappā raṭī! 17
tāyaik kollum pañcattait
      taṭukka muyaṟci yuṟār
vāyait tiṟantu cummā - kiḷiyē!
      vantē mātara meṉpār! 18
---------------
24. Pseudo-Patriots (1-6-1907, 15-6-1907) (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
1. Neither stoutness of heart
Nor nonest skill have they;
Oh parrot, these are cheats
And verbal heroes all.
2. They join the crowd and add
To its noise; nothing great,
Oh parrot, perceive they,
These wilful forgetters.
3. Can the blind hope to have
Autonomy? Comforts? Greatness?
Oh parrot! Can the sexless dream of joy?
4. Eyes they have, but cannot see;
They are a bunch of girls,
Oh parrot! Oh what use
Are words which avail not?
5. "Our textile mills, our own
Garments" they would loud cry.
Oh parrot, did ever
Mantras produce mangoes?
6. "Salt, sugar and sarees
Home-spun", loud will they vaunt,
Oh parrot, and vanish;
They know not how these are wrought.
7. "Women's honour, bhakti
To God": Thus blab their tongues
Oh parrot, they are all
The utterly faithless.
8. When women were raped
And engendered evil
Oh parrot, like cowards
They clung fast to their life.
9. In the Mother's Temple
When others wrought evil
Oh parrot, fear-ridden
They deemed life more precious.
10. Fear and sheer impotence
And petty vassal-mind
Oh parrot, were lofty
To them, the dead and dumb.
11. Do these beasts, oh parrot,
Deserve to live at all
With no passion for truth
Vigour and inner strength?
12. Can one be, oh parrot
Amidst the heinous gang
Who think that life sullied
Is greater than honour?
13. Their heart is after wine,
Their lips chant the Lord's name;
"Hail Mother" they loud shout,
All mindless, oh parrot.
14. "Ancient Past" blabber they,
The hypocrites; what do
The ignoramuses
Know of it, oh parrot?
15. National infamy,
Shameless itch for base wealth
Mark these cads, oh parrot,
Who are in meanness steeped.
16. Their own brothers perish
in misery; yet are they
Without scruple, oh parrot!
Of goodness are these reft.
17. Sons of Bharath die like worms
In famine and disease;
They eye this, oh parrot,
Sunk in unfeeling sloth.
18. They essay not to fend
The famine that preys on
Mother, but shout aloud
"Hail Mother", oh parrot!
- Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
(To be continued)
Note: The Tamil original was serialised in India. Bharati desired to add
some more stanzas to this poem. His note at the end of this poem (India)
says: "To be continued". However the poem as published later in Swadesa
Gitankal (1908) contains eighteen stanzas only.
----------------
25. entaiyun tāyu makiḻntu kulāvi
entaiyun tāyu makiḻntu kulāvi
      yiruntatu minnāṭē -ataṉ
muntaiya rāyira māṇṭukaḷ vāḻntu
      muṭintatu minnāṭē -avar
cintaiyi lāyira meṇṇam vaḷarntu
      ciṟantatu minnāṭē -itai
vantaṉai kūṟi maṉati liruttiyeṉ
      vāyuṟa vāḻttēṉō -itai
vantē mātaram, vantē mātaram
      eṉṟu vaṇaṅkēṉō? …..1
iṉṉuyir tantemai yīṉṟu vaḷarttaru
      ḷīntatu minnāṭē -eṅkaḷ
aṉṉaiyar tōṉṟi maḻalaikaḷ kūṟi
      aṟintatu minnāṭē -avar
kaṉṉi yarāki nilaviṉi lāṭik
      kaḷittatu minnāṭē -taṅkaḷ
poṉṉuṭa liṉpuṟa nīrviṉai yāṭiyil
      pōntatu minnāṭē -itai
vantē mātaram, vantē mātaram
      eṉṟu vaṇaṅkēṉō?…..2
maṅkaiya rāyavar illaṟa naṉku
      vaḷarttatu minnāṭē -avar
taṅka matalaik ḷīṉṟamu tūṭṭit
      taḻuvi tinnāṭē -makkaḷ
tuṅka muyarntu vaḷarkeṉak kōyilkaḷ
      cūḻntatu minnāṭē -piṉṉar
aṅkavar māya avaruṭaṟ pūntukaḷ
      ārntatu minnāṭē -itai
vantē mātaram,vantē mātaram
      eṉṟu vaṇaṅkēṉō?…..3
---------------
25. Adoration of the Country (1907)
This is our motherland, Bharat!
It's here our parents dear loved and lived
In joyous wedlock pure.
Our forebears too in ages past
Had lived for centuries, ere they died.
A myriad noble thoughts they had
To enrich the land and make it great
Shan't I enthrone you in my heart,
While my grateful tongue doth sing thy praise:
Salutations to thee! Mother! Salutations!'
This our land gave us life
And sustenance, and blessed us too:
This is the land of our mothers dear;
It fostered them in their infancy
When as babes they lisped their words;
It saw them grow into tender maids
And sport and dance in the moonlit night;
Their golden limbs gladdened the waters
As they swam and bathed in pure delight,
Ere they returned to the quiet of their homes.
I shall sing thy praise in grateful tunes,
'Salutations to thee! Mother! Salutations!'
In time they loved and wives became
And learnt to manage households great;
They fondled and fed their golden babes
And raised and fostered righteous homes;
Here all around were temples tall
That soared aloft to bless the lands;
When our forefathers died, their flow'ry dust
Became part of the country's rich humus;
Shan't I sing thy praise in grateful tunes,
'Salutations to thee! Mother! Salutations!'
- Prof. K.G.Seshadri
Note: The Tamil original was published along with two other poems in the
form of pamphlet entitled 'Swadesa Gitankal'. V.Krishnaswami Iyer who
later became a judge of the High Court of Tamil Nadu met the expenses
for the publication.
-------------
26. eṅkaḷ nāṭu
maṉṉu mimayamalai yeṅkaḷ malaiyē
      mānila mītatu pōṟpiṟi tilaiyē
iṉṉaṟu nīrkkaṅkai yāṟeṅkaḷ yāṟē
      iṅkitaṉ māṇpiṟ ketiretu vēṟē
paṉṉaru mupaniṭa nūleṅkaḷ nūlē
      pārmicai yētoru nūlita pōlē!
poṉṉoḷir pārat nāṭeṅkaḷ nāṭē
      pōṟṟuva mihtai yemakkillai yīṭē 1
101. mārata vīrar malintanaṉ ṉāṭu
      māmuṉi vōrpalar vāḻntapoṉṉāṭu
nārata kāṉ nalantikaḻnāṭu
      nallaṉa yāvaiyu nāṭu ṟunāṭu
pūraṇa ñāṉam polinta naṉṉāṭu
      puttar pirāṉaruḷ poṅkiya nāṭu
pārata nāṭu paḻamperu nāṭē       pāṭu miḵtai yemakkiḷaiyīṭē 2
iṉṉalvan tūṟṟiṭum pōtataṟkañcōm
      ēḻaiyarāki yiṉimaṇṇiṟ ṟuñcōm
taṉṉalam pēṇi yiḻitoḻilpuriyōm
      tāyttiru nāṭeṉi liṉikkaiyaiviriyōm
kaṉṉalun tēṉum kaṉiyumiṉpālum
      kataliyum cennelum nalkumekkālum
uṉṉata āriya nāṭeṅkaḷ nāṭē
      otuva mihtai yemakkilaiyīṭē 3
--------------
26. Enkal Nadu (1907) (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
1. Himachal is our mountain
      The world hath not its fellow;
Ganga is our fountain
      Pellucid, sweet and mellow.
Our Upanishads are twelve --
      Unknown to any other clime--:
Deep into our minds they delve,
      And soar aloft sublime,
Praise we Bharat, golden fair,
      Our own dear land beyond compare! .
2. Land of the heroic free
      Where sages have lived at peace,
Soothed by the poesy
      Of Narad's, melodies:
Where Buddha came to birth,
      -- The embodiment of grace --
And showed to men on earth
      Divine Compassion's face:
Sing we Bharat ancient, fair
      Our own dear land, beyond compare!
3. Evil shall not daunt us
      Though poor, we will be proud:
The world shall no more taunt us
      With being a self-seeking crowd:
Here Nature's bright and sunny
      And yields us every good,
Including milk and honey,
      As our unfailing food.
Land of noble Aryans fair
      Repeat we: 'Bharat is beyond compare!'
--Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original is one of the three poems which constitute
Swdesa
Gitankal -- 1907. The poem was republished in India. on 14-8-1909.
------------------
27. lājpatrāy tuti
viṇṇakattē yiravitaṉai vaittālum
      ataṉkatirkaḷ viraittu vantu
kaṇṇakattē yoḷitarutal kāṇkilamō?
      niṉṉaiyavar kaṉaṉṟin nāṭṭu
maṇṇakattē vāḻātu puṟañceytum
      yāṅkaḷelā maṟakko ṇātem
eṇṇakattē, lājapati, yiṭaiyiṉṟi
      nīvaḷartaṟ keṉcey vārō? 1
orumaṉitaṉ ṟaṉaippaṟṟip palanāṭu
      kaṭattiyavaṟ kūṟu ceytal
arumaiyilai; eḷitiṉavar purintiṭṭā
      reṉṟiṭiṉum anta mēlāṉ
perumaiyainaṉ kaṟintavaṉait teyvameṉa
      neñciṉuḷē peṭpiṟ pēṇi
varumaṉita reṇṇaṟṟār ivaraiyelām
      oṭṭiyevar vāḻva tiṅkē? 2
pēraṉpu ceytāril yāvarē
      peruntuyaram piḻaittu niṉṟār?
āraṉpu nāraṇaṉpā liraṇiyaṉcēy
      ceytatiṉā lavaṉuk kuṟṟa
kōraṅkaḷ colattakumō? pāratanāṭ
      ṭiṟpatti kulavi vāḻum
vīraṅkoḷ maṉamuṭaiyār koṭuntuyaram
      palavaṭaital viyattaṟ koṉṟō? 3
-------------
27. Lajapathy (1908) (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
1. Even if the Sun be in the skiey expanse
Dowe not behold its rays flowing down
And bow, to mingle with the light of eyes
Thus endowing them with lustre of light?
Even if they, in wrath, have exiled you
Away from this soil, if you get established
In our thought that knows no forgetfulness,
And if you do flourish there without let
O Lajapathy! what can they for this do?
2. It spells no good to haunt a man and him
Exile from country to country; they might
Have wrought this with ease; but myriads there are
Instinct with the knowledge of his glory;
In them is he well enshrined; how can they
Ever hope to expel these and live in peace?
3. Who among them that practised universal love
Was ever spared (of punishments)? Hiranya's child
Showed utmost love unto Narayana;
Who could ever relate the vile horrors
He underwent; is it then a wonder
To witness the miseries of patriots
Courageously devoted to Bharat!
- Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original was one of the poems of Swadesa Gitankal (1908)
published by Bharati.
-------------
28. pūpēntira vijayam
pāpēnti riyañceṟutta eṅkaḷ vivē
      kānantap paramaṉ ñāṉa
rūpēnti raṉṟaṉakkup piṉvantōṉ
      viṇṇavanta mulakai yāḷpara
vīḻttalpeṟat tarumamelām, maṟamaṉaittuṅ
      kiḷattuvara mēlōr tammai
tāḻttamar muṉṉōṅka nilaipuraṇṭu
      pātakamē tatumpi niṟkum
maṇṇāḷu maṉṉaravaṉ taṉaicciṟaicey
      tiṭṭālu mānta rellāṅ
kaṇṇākak karutiyavaṉ pukaḻōti
      vāḻttimaṉaṅ kaḷikkiṉ ṟārāl
iṉṉāta piṟarkkeṇṇāṉ pārata nāṭ
      ṭiṟkiraṅki yitaya naivāṉ
oṉṉāreṉ ṟevarumilāṉ ulakaṉaittu
      mōruyireṉ ṟuṇarnta ñāṉi
-----------
28. On Bhupendra (1908) (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
1. He is the chela of Vivekananda
-- The Conqueror of rebellious organs
Of sense, the one divine whose form is wrought Of supernal wisdom --,
even if exposed
To the wrath of the celestial Lord
He will not from Dharma deviate.
He is Bhupendra, the loving servant
Of Mother India that is Bharat.
2. When dharma falls and unrighteousness thrives,
When great ones wane and the base do wax great,
When sin holds sway over deranged nature,
To kill evil Kali, to' usher in
The advent of a new blessed era,
He the diamond-hearted hero great
Stands firm and reveals to us in all love
The state of things when this yuga should end.
3. Even if the ruler of earth should have him
Incarcerated, him the people deem
As their very eyes, sing his glory great,
Pour on him blessing and feel delighted.
Yet there are a few -- thoughtless and mindless --,
Who do condemn things good, as evil vile.
These are like the birds of darkness that shun
The sun and love dearly, dread darkness dense.
4. His thinking cannot harm others at all;
His heart melts in love for the land of Bharat.
No one is his foe; this wise seer doth know
That one Life animates all lives on earth.
They that imprisoned him are totally blind;
They know not aught of the great glorious.
"No joy ensues without pain in the past!"
Surely have the wise men thus summed it up.
-Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original forms part of Swadesa Gitankal -- 1908.
----------------
29. lājpatrāy piralāpam
nāṭiḻantu makkaḷaiyu nallāḷai yumpirintu
vīṭiḻan tiṅkuṟṟēṉ vitiyiṉaiyeṉ ceālkēṉē       1
vētamuṉi pēāṉṟār viruttarā mentaiyiru
pātamalar kaṇṭu paravap peṟuvēṉēā?       2
ācaik kumara naruccuṉaṉaip pēālvāṉṟaṉ
mācaṟṟa cēāti vataṉamiṉik kāṇpēṉēā?       3
aṉṟilaippēāṉ ṟeṉṉai yaraikkaṇamē ṉumpirintāl
kuṉṟimaṉañ cēārvāḷik kēālam peāṟuppāḷēā?       4
vīṭu muṟavum veṟuttālu meṉṉarumai
nāṭu pirinta naliviṉukkeṉ ceykēṉē?       5
ātimaṟai tēāṉṟiyanal lāriyanā ṭennāḷu
nītimaṟai viṉṟi nilaitta tirunāṭu       6
cintuveṉun teyvat tirunatiyu maṟṟatiṟcēr
aintumaṇi yāṟum aḷikkum puṉaṉāṭu       7
aimpulaṉai veṉṟa aṟavēārkku māṟṟalartam
vempulaṉai veṉṟa eṇṇil vīrarukkun tāynāṭu       8
nallaṟattai nāṭṭutaṟku namperumāṉ keḷaravarām
pullaraic ceṟṟāḻtta puṉitap perunāṭu       9
kaṉṉāṇun tiṇṭēāṭ kaḷavīraṉ pārttaṉeāru
viṉṉā ṇeālikēṭṭa mēṉmait tirunāṭu       10
kaṉṉa ṉirunta karuṇainilam tarmaṉeṉu
maṉṉa ṉaṟaṅkaḷ vaḷartta pukaḻnāṭu       11
āriyartan tarmanilai yātarippāṉ vīṭṭumaṉār
nāriyartaṅ kātal tuṟantirunta naṉṉāṭu.       12
vīmaṉ vaḷarnta viṟaṉāṭu villacuvat
tāma ṉiruntu camarpurinta vīranilam       13
cīkkareṉu meṅkaḷ viṟaṟciṅkaṅkaḷ vāḻataru nal
lākkamuyar kuṉṟa maṭarntirukkum peāṉṉāṭu       14
āriyar pāḻākā tarumaṟaiyiṉ uṇmaitanta
cīriyar meyñ ñāṉa tayānantar tirunāṭu       15
eṉṉarumaip pāñcāla meṉṟēṉum kāṇpēṉēā?
paṉṉariya tuṉpam paṭarntiṅkē māyvēṉēā?       16
ētellām pāratattē innāḷ naṭappaṉavēā?
ētellām yāṉaṟiyā teṉmaṉitar paṭṭaṉarēā?       17
eṉṉai niṉaintu miraṅkuvarēā? allātu
piṉṉait tuyarkaḷi leṉ pēru maṟantiṭṭārēā?       18
teāṇṭupaṭṭu vāṭu meṉṟaṉ tūya peru nāṭṭiṟ
keāṇṭuviṭṭaṅ keṉṉaiyuṭaṉ keāṉṟālu miṉpuṟuvēṉ 19
ettaṉaijaṉ maṅkaḷ iruṭciṟaiyi liṭṭālum
tattupuṉaṟ pāñcālan taṉṉil vaittāl vāṭukilēṉ. 20
-----------
29. Lajapathy's Lament (1908) (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
Am I to bemoan my fate? My country
I lost; separated from goodly wife
Children dear and my home here I dwell!
Will I ever be blessed to behold and hail
The flower-feet of my aged father who is
Verily a Rishi of Vedic times?
Can I ever behold the bright blemishless face
Of my beloved son, Arjuna-like?
Can my wife, an anril-bird that brooks not
Parting of her mate for a split second
This wretched plight of mine ever suffer?
Even if my family and relations
Hate me, Oh, it is nothing; what did I do
To deserve this exile from my loved land?
Arya-Varta is the land whence Vedas Sprang;
it is a land where justice ever prevails!
It is the land where flows the divine Indus
To which is linked the five gems of rivers!
It is the Mother-land of those righteous
Who quelled the senses five, and of those heroes
Innumerable, who their enemies vanquished:
It is the holy land great, where our Deity
Killed the base Kauravas to stablish Dharma!
'Tis the noble land divine which heard (in cheer)
The twang of strong-shouldered Arjuna's bow!
'Tis the lofty land of mercy where Karna
Flourished and Dharma the king fostered
Dharma! It is the great land where Bhishma, the Pillar
Of Aryan culture lived a celibate!
It is the heroic land where Bhima flourished
And Aswattama. waged fierce battles!
t is the golden land fecund with hills,
The home of Sikhs, our mighty Lions of war!
It is the divine land where Dayananda
The Sage of Truth and Saviour of Aryas
Expounded the true import of the Vedas!
Will I ever behold my dear land
Of Panchalam, or will I perish here
Beset by sorrows unutterable?
What may be the happenings in Bharat
These days? What may be the hardships, of which
I know not aught, my people are put to?
Are they distressed at my plight? Or have they
In their miseries forgot even my name?
If to my enslaved land, holy and great
I'm brought for killing, I 'll be most happy
Incarceration in darksome prison
For generations, I mind not; if I am
Jailed in Panchalam, I will never wilt.
- Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original forms part of 'Swadesa Gitankal -- 1908.
--------------
30. svarājyam vēṇṭumeṉṟa pāratavāsikku
āṅkilēya uttiyōkastaṉ kūṟuvatu
nantaṉār carittirattiluḷḷa "māṭu tiṉṉum pulaiyā! uṉakku
mārkaḻit tirunāḷā?" eṉṟa pāṭṭiṉ varṇameṭṭu
toṇṭu ceyyum aṭimai! - uṉakku
      cutantira niṉaivōṭā?
paṇṭu kaṇṭa tuṇṭō ? - ataṟku
      pāttira māvāyō? (toṇṭu)
jātic caṇṭai pōccō? - uṅkaḷ
      camayac caṇṭai pōccō?
nīti colla vantāy! - kaṇmuṉ
      niṟko ṇātu pōṭā! (toṇṭu)
accam nīṅki ṉāyō? - aṭimai
      āṇmai tāṅki ṉāyō?
piccai vāṅkip piḻaikkum - ācai
      pēṇu taloḻit tāyō? (toṇṭu)
kappa lēṟu vāyō? - aṭimai
      kaṭalait tāṇṭu vāyō?
kuppai virumpum nāykkē - aṭimai
      koṟṟat tavicu muṇṭō ? (toṇṭu)
oṟṟumai payiṉ ṟāyō? - aṭimai
      uṭalpil valimai yuṇṭō ?
veṟṟu raipē cātē! aṭimai!
      vīriyam aṟi vāyō? (toṇṭu)
cērntu vāḻu vīrō? - uṅkaḷ
      ciṟumaik kuṇaṅkaḷ pōccō?
cōrntu vīḻtal pōccō - uṅkaḷ
      cōmparait tuṭait tīrō? (toṇṭu)
veḷḷai niṟattaik kaṇṭāl - pataṟi
      veruvalai oḻit tāyō?
uḷḷatu colvēṉ kēḷ - cutantiram
      uṉakkillai maṟan tiṭaṭā! (toṇṭu)
nāṭu kāppa taṟkē - uṉakku
      ñāṉam ciṟatu muṇṭō ?
vīṭu kākkap pōṭā! - aṭimai
      vēlai ceyyap pōṭā! (toṇṭu)
cēṉai naṭattu vāyō? - toḻumpukaḷ
      ceytiṭa virumpu vāyō?
īṉa māṉa toḻilē - uṅkaḷukku
      icaiva tākum pōṭā! (toṇṭu)
-------------
30. An English Official Addresses an Indian Citizen Bent Upon Freedom
(1908) (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
1. O slave sunk in thraldom,
Can you think of freedom?
Eler seen it in the past?
Merit none have you, outcast.
2. Done with feuds religious?
Or wars sacriligious?
Speak you of justice here?
I bid you disappear.
3. O slave, is your fear gone?
Are you a man of brawn?
Do you not on alms live,
To beggary a votive?
4. Can you, slave, board a ship
And the ocean outstrip?
Can a cur of dung-hill Aspire a throne to fill?
5. Do you know unity
Or masculinity?
Slave, speak not gibberish;
Your valour is womanish.
6. Could you live together?
Would your baseness wither?
Would your lassitude die?
Could you sloth defy?
7. When you eye the white hue
Can you, your fright subdue?
To the bare truth, hearken:
Freedom is not in your ken.
8. You are not of the sect
A nation to protect
Go, the house you should tend
And to duties attend.
9. Would you an army lead?
Or deem slaving your meed?
Lowly jobs fit you well;
May you in them excel!
--Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original forms part of Swadesa Gitankal -- 1908.
------------------
31. māyaiyaip paḻittal
uṇmai yaṟintavar uṉṉaik kaṇippārō?
      māyaiyē!-maṉat
tiṇmaiyuḷḷārai nī ceyvatu moṉṟuṇṭō!-
      māyaiyē!
ettaṉai kōṭi paṭaikoṇṭu vantālum
      māyaiyē! nī
cittat teḷiveṉun tīyiṉmuṉ niṟpāyō?
      -māyaiyē!
eṉṉaik keṭuppataṟ keṇṇamuṟṟāy keṭṭa
      māyaiyē!-nāṉ
uṉṉaik keṭuppa tuṟutiyeṉ ṟēyuṇar
      māyaiyē!
cākat tuṇiyiṟ camuttira memmaṭṭu
      māyaiyē!-intat
tēkam poy yeṉṟuṇar turarai yeṉ
      ceyvāy māyaiyē!
irumai yaḻintapiṉ eṅkiruppāy,
      aṟpa māyaiyē!-
teḷin torumai kaṇṭōr muṉṉam
      ōṭātu niṟpaiyō?-māyaiyē!
nītarum iṉpattai nēreṉṟu koḷvaṉō
      māyaiyē-ciṅkam
nāytarak koḷḷumō nallara cāṭciyai
      -māyaiyē!
eṉṉiccai koṇṭuṉai yeṟṟiviṭa
      vallēṉ māyaiyē!-iṉi
uṉṉiccai koṇṭeṉak koṉṟum
      varātu kāṇ-māyaiyē! -
yārkkum kuṭiyallēṉ yāṉeṉpa
      tōrntaṉaṉ māyaiyē!-uṉtaṉ
pōrkkañcu vēṉō poṭiyākkuvēṉ
      uṉṉai-māyaiyē!
---------------
31. On Maya (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
1. Will knowers of truth think on you Maya?
Can you dare harm the stout-hearted at all?
2. Maya! may be you are armipotent;
Still can you brave the flame of Mind's clarity?
3. You are resolved to spoil me, Maya fou!!
Know that I will rout you sure, oh Maya!
4. To one wooing death, depth of sea is nought;
Can you harm heroes that transcend body?
5. When duality, dies, where will you be?
Can you, little prig, face the great Monists?
6. Will I go in for the joy you offer?
Will a lion accept a cur's sceptre?
1
7. You, will I clapperclaw by my sheet will,
But hurtless, stand 'gainst your impotent will.
8. I am no man's slave, I know oh Maya:
I'm armed for you; I 'll hack you to pieces.
- Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original forms part of Swadesa Gitankal -- 1908.
-----------------
32. āriya taricaṉam - ōr kaṉavu
kaṉaveṉṉa kaṉavē -- eṉṟaṉ
kaṇtuyi lātu naṉaviṉilē yuṟṟa (kaṉa) (kaṉa)
kāṉakaṅ kaṇṭēṉ -- aṭā
kāṉakaṅ kaṇṭēṉ -- ucci
vāṉakattē vaṭṭa matiyoḷi kaṇṭēṉ. (kaṉa) 1
[pāṭa pētam]: 'cirittiṭuṅ kōḻiyāy'
'aṭā' eṉpataṟkup patilāka 'aṭar' eṉṟum
pāṭapētamuṇṭu.
poṟṟiruk kuṉṟam -- aṅkor
poṟṟiruk kuṉṟam-ataic
cuṟṟi yirukkum cuṉaikaḷum poykaiyum. (kaṉa) 2
putta taricaṉam
kuṉṟattiṉ mītē -- antak
kuṉṟattiṉ mītē-taṉi
niṉṟator ālaneṭumaraṅ kaṇṭēṉ. (kaṉa) 3
poṉmarat tiṉkīḻ -- antap
poṉmarat tiṉkīḻ -- veṟuñ
ciṉmaya māṉatōr tēvaṉ iruntaṉaṉ. (kaṉa) 4
putta pakavaṉ -- eṅkaḷ
putta pakavaṉ -- avaṉ
cuttameyñ ñāṉac cuṭarmukaṅ kaṇṭēṉ. (kaṉa) 5.
kāntiyaip pārttēṉ -- avaṉ
kāntiyaip pārttēṉ -- upa
cāntiyil mūḻkit tatumpik kuḷittaṉaṉ .(kaṉa) 6.
ītunal vintai! -- eṉṉai!
ītunal vintai! -- puttaṉ
cōti maṟaintiruḷ tuṉṉiṭak kaṇṭaṉaṉ. (kaṉa) 7
pāyntataṅ koḷiyē; -- piṉṉum
pāyntataṅ koḷiyē! -- aruḷ
tōynta teṉmēṉi cilirttiṭak kaṇṭēṉ. (kaṉa) 8
kiruṣṇārjīṉa taricaṉam
kuṉṟattiṉ mītē -- antak
kuṉṟattiṉ mītē -- taṉi
niṉṟa poṟṟērum parikaḷum kaṇṭēṉ. (kaṉa) 9
tēriṉmuṉ pākaṉ -- maṇit
tēriṉmuṉ pākaṉ -- avaṉ
cīriṉaik kaṇṭu tikaittuniṉ ṟēṉintak (kaṉa) 10
ōmeṉṟa moḻiyum -- avaṉ
ōmeṉṟa moḻiyum -- nīlak
kāmaṉṟaṉ uruvumav vīmaṉṟaṉ tiṟalum (kaṉa) 11
aruḷ poṅkum viḻiyum -- teyva
aruḷ poṅkum viḻiyum -- kāṇil
iruḷ poṅkum neñciṉar veruḷ poṅkun tikiriyum, (kaṉa) 12
kaṇṇaṉaik kaṇṭēṉ -- eṅkaḷ
kaṇṇaṉaik kaṇṭēṉ -- maṇi
vaṇṇaṉai ñāṉa malaiyiṉaik kaṇṭēṉ. (kaṉa) 13
cēṉaikaḷ tōṉṟum -- veḷḷac
cēṉaikaḷ tōṉṟum -- pari
yāṉaiyun tērum aḷavila tōṉṟum. (kaṉa) 14
kaṇṇaṉ naṟ ṟēril -- nīlak
kaṇṇaṉ naṟ ṟēril -- mika
eṇṇayarn tāṉor iḷaiñaṉaik kaṇṭēṉ. (kaṉa) 15
vicaiyaṉko livaṉē! -- viṟal
vicaiyaṉko livaṉē! -- naṉi
icaiyunaṉ kicaiyumiṅ kivaṉukkiṉ nāmam. (vicai) 16
vīriya vaṭivam! -- eṉṉa
vīriya vaṭivam! -- inta
āriyaṉ neñcam ayarntateṉ vintai! (vicai) 17
peṟṟateṉ pēṟē -- cevi
peṟṟateṉ pēṟē -- antak
koṟṟavaṉ coṟkaḷ ceviyuṟak koṇṭēṉ. (kaṉa) 18
veṟṟiyai vēṇṭēṉ; -- aiya,
veṟṟiyai vēṇṭēṉ; -- uyirai
aṟṟiṭu mēṉum avartamait tīṇṭēṉ. (peṟṟa) 19
cuṟṟaṅ kolvēṉō? -- eṉṟaṉ
cuṟṟaṅ kolvēṉō? -- kiḷai
aṟṟapiṉ ceyyum aracumōr aracō?? (peṟṟa) 20
miñciya aruḷāl -- mita
miñciya aruḷāl -- anta
veñcilai vīraṉ palacol virittāṉ. (kaṉa) 21
immoḻi kēṭṭāṉ -- kaṇṇaṉ
immoḻi kēṭṭāṉ -- aiyaṉ
cemmalar vataṉattiṟ ciṟunakai pūttāṉ. (kaṉa) 22
villiṉai yeṭaṭā -- kaiyil
villiṉai yeṭaṭā -- antap
pulliyar kūṭṭattaip pūḻti ceytiṭaṭā. (villiṉai) 23
vāṭi nillātē; -- maṉam
vāṭi nillātē; -- veṟum
pēṭiyar ñāṉap pitaṟṟal collātē. (villiṉai) 24
oṉṟuḷa tuṇmai -- eṉṟum
oṉṟuḷa tuṇmai -- ataik
koṉṟi ṭoṇātu kuṟaitta loṇṇātu. (villiṉai) 25
tuṉpamu millai -- koṭun
tuṉpamu millai -- atil
iṉpamu millai piṟappiṟap pillai. (villiṉai) 26
paṭaikaḷun tīṇṭā -- ataip
paṭaikaḷun tīṇṭā -- aṉal
cuṭavu moṇṇātu puṉalnaṉai yātu.(villiṉai) 27
ceytaluṉ kaṭaṉē -- aṟañ
ceytaluṉ kaṭaṉē -- atil
eytuṟum viḷaiviṉil eṇṇam vaikkātē. (villiṉai) 28
-----------
32. Arya-Darshan-- A Dream (1908)
1. Oh what a dream it was,
The dream I dreamed When I slept not
But was wide awake!
2. A forest I saw;
A forest dense with trees,
And in the sky right overhead,
I saw the light of a full round moon.
3. Oh what a dream it was,
The dream I dreamed
When I slept not
But was wide awake!
4. A lovely golden hill,
A lovely golden hill was there,
And many a tarn was round about
And many a flowery pool!
(Oh! what a dream it was)
Buddha Darshan
5. Upon the hill,
There, upon the hill,
I saw a spreading banyan tree
Which in solitary grandeur stood. (Oh what a dream it was)
6. Under that golden tree,
There, under that golden tree,
Sat a glorious Godly Being
Compact of Pure Intelligence! (Oh what a dream it was).
7. Lo! 'twas the Lord Buddha,
Lo! 'Iwas the Lord Buddha, our own,
I saw His radiant Lustrous face
Whence Pure Intelligence beamed! (Oh! what a dream it was)
8. I saw His Glory,
I saw the Glory of the Lord,
Immersed He was in a tranquil ocean,
An overflowing Sea of Peace! (Oh what a dream it was)
9. Behold a miracle,
Behold a goodly miracle!
I saw the light of the Buddha vanish;
And a deep darkness fall! (Oh! what a dream it was)
10. Sudden there streamed a light,
Sudden there streamed a light, once again
I saw the dwindling darkness fade;
Amazed and thrilled I stood! (Oh! what a dream it was)
Krishnarjuna Darshan
Il. Upon the hill,
There, upon the hill, I saw a single chariot of gold
And a team of horses standing (Oh! what a dream it was)
12. On the box was the charioteer,
On the box was the charioteer of the jewelled car.
Fascinated by His comely grace
In wonder dazed, I stood! (Oh! what a dream it was)
13. Thy mystic 'Om' I heard;
Thy mystic 'Om' I heard Him utter,
Cupid's lovely form He had, but blue;
And Bhima's mighty strength! (Oh! what a dream it was)
14. And eyes brimming with love,
Eyes brimming with love divine;
And a whirling discus which terror struck
Into evil-dwelling hearts! (Oh! what a dream it was)
15. Lo! Armies appeared there,
Lo! Armies appeared there whose name is legion:
And horses, elephants, and chariots tall
In countless numbers stood! (Oh what a dream it was)
16. On Krishna's goodly chariot,
On blue Krishna's goodly chariot,
I saw a youthful warrior standing."
Overborne he seemed with thought! (Oh! what a dream it was)
17. This is he, the Conqueror,
Surely, this Vijaya the bold.
How well does that name become him,
How well that name of fame! (This is he, the conqueror)
18. A valiant, manly form,
Oh what a valiant, manly form!
Yet dejected seemed that noble chief.
Why--How astonishing this! (This is he, the conqueror)
19. Blest indeed was I;
Blest indeed was I to hear:
For with mine own ears I heard
Every word which that chieftain spoke. (Oh what a dream it was)
20. 'I care not for victory,
I care not for victory, Oh! my Lord,
I will not hurt them, no, nor touch them
Though my own life be forfeit.' . (Blest indeed was 1)
21. 'Shall I slay my kinsmen?
Shall I slay dear kinsmen of mine?
To rule when all kinsfolk are slain,
Won't it be a worthless rule?' (Blest indeed was I)
22. Out of abounding love,
Out of super-abounding love,
That mighty warrior, archer bold,
Many a word he spoke at length! (Oh what a dream it was)
23. He heard those words;
He, Krishna, heard those words:
And on the Lord's countenance, lovely as a lotus,
There gleamed a gentle smile! (Oh! what a dream it was)
24. 'Oh Come! Take up your bow!
Oh Come! Take up your bow in your hands
And this crowd of puny folk
Pulverise into specks of dust! (Oh Come! Take up your bow)
25. 'Stand up, and yield not to despair!
Stand up, and yield not your heart to despair!
No, nor speak words of foolish wisdom
Which only cowards speak! (Oh Come! Take up your bow)
26. 'One Supreme Truth there is,
One Supreme Truth eternal,
Never can that Truth be destroyed;
Nor ever be whittled down. (Oh Come! Take up your bow)
27. 'There is no sorrow, now:
There is neither sorrow, nor pain:
Nor is there any joy:
Nor birth; no, nor ever death! (Oh Come! Take up your bow)
28. 'Weapons cannot hurt it;
Weapons cannot hurt it at all:
Fire cannot burn it;
Nor can water wet it. (On Come! Take up your bow)
29. 'Your duty is: 'To do."
Your duty is: 'To do the Right'
Without bestwoing a single thought
Upon the fruits thereof!
30. Oh Come! Take up your bow
Oh Come! Take up the bow in your hands:
And this crowd of puny folk
Pulverise into speaks of dust'
- Thiru P.N.Appuswami
Note: The Tamil original forms part of Swadesa Gitankál -- 1908.
---------------------
33. vīra cutantiram vēṇṭiniṉ ṟārpiṉṉar
cutantirap perumai
"tillai evaḷiyilē kalantuviṭ ṭālavar
tirumpiyum varuvārō?"eṉṉum varṇameṭṭu
vīra cutantiram vēṇṭi niṉṟār piṉṉar
      vēṟoṉṟu koḷvārō?-eṉṟum
āramu tuṇṇutaṟ kācai koṇṭār kaḷḷil
      aṟivaic celuttuvārō? (vīra)
pukaḻunal laṟamumē yaṉṟiyel lāmevaṟum
      koyyeṉṟu kaṇṭā rēl-avar
ikaḻuṟum īṉattoṇ ṭiyaṟṟiyum vāḻvataṟku
      iccaiyuṟ ṟiruppārō? (vīra)
piṟantavar yāvarum iṟappa tuṟutiyeṉum
      peṟṟiyai aṟintā rēl-māṉam
tuṟantaṟam maṟantumpiṉ uyirkoṇṭu vāḻvatu
      cukameṉṟu matippārō? (vīra)
māṉuṭa jaṉmam peṟuvataṟ kariteṉum
      vāymaiyai uyarntā rēl-avar
ūṉuṭal tīyiṉum uṇmai nilaitavaṟa
      uṭaṉpaṭu māṟuḷa tō? (vīra)
viṇṇi liravitaṉai viṟṟuviṭ ṭevarumpōy
      miṉmiṉi koḷvā rō?
kaṇṇiṉum iṉiya cutantiram pōṉapiṉ
      kaikaṭṭip piḻaippā rō? (vīra)
maṇṇiliṉ paṅkaḷai virumpic cutantirattiṉ
      māṇpiṉai yiḻappārō?
kaṇṇiraṇṭum viṟṟuc cittiram vāṅkiṉāl
      kaikoṭṭic ciriyārō! (vīra)
vantē mātaram eṉṟu vaṇaṅkiyapiṉ
      māyattai vaṇaṅkuva rō?
vantē mātaram oṉṟē tārakam
      eṉpatai maṟappārō? (vīra)
---------
33. Liberty (1908)
1. Those that set their brave hearts on liberty,
Will they take aught else thereafter?
Thirsting for the nectar of gods,
Would they think of today?
2. Dharma alone lives; All else is transient;
Those that have seen this truth,
Would they seek to live thereafter
In servitude dishonourable?
3. Every one that is born must surely die:
Those that have realised this law,
Would they deem to pleasure to live,
Disregarding honour and duty?
4. To be born as man is rarest privilege:
Those that realise this truth;
Would they agree to enslave their souls,
Even if their bodies be thrown in the fire?
5. Would you barter the sun that shines in the sky
For a glow-worm to play with?
Losing freedom dearer than eyesight
Can you live in servitude bowing?
6. Thinking to enjoy comforts
Would you give up freedom?
Is it not foolish to buy a picture,
Selling both your eyes for the price?
7. Having said Vande Mataram and bowed to the mother,
Can you offer worship to Maya?
How can you ever forget that Vande Mataram
Is the true song of salvation?
- Thiru C.Rajagopalachariar -
Note: The Tamil original forms part of Swadesa Gitankal -- 1908.
------------------
34. mēttā tilakarukkuc colvatu
namma jātik kaṭukkumō
(putiya kaṭcit talaivarai nōkki nitāṉak kaṭciyār collutal)
"ōy nantaṉārē! namma jātik kaṭukkumō?
niyāyan tāṉō? nīr collum?" eṉṟa varṇameṭṭu
pallavi
ōy tilakarē! namma jātik kaṭukkumō?
ceyvatu cariyō? collum
kaṇṇikaḷ
muṉṉaṟi yāp putu vaḻakkam nīr
      mūṭṭi viṭṭa tintap paḻakkam - ippōtu
ennakarilu mitu muḻakkam - mika
      iṭumpai ceyyum inta oḻukkam (ōy tilakarē)
cutantiram eṉkiṟa pēccu - eṅkaḷ
      toḻumpuka ḷellām vīṇāyp pōccu - itu
matampiṭit tatupōlāccu - eṅkaḷ
      maṉitark kellām vanta tēccu (ōy tilakarē)
veḷḷai niṟattavarkkē rājyam - aṉṟi
      vēṟe varkkumatu tiyājyam - ciṟu
piḷḷaika ḷukkē upatēcam - nīr
      pēcivaitta tellām mōcam (ōy tilakarē)
--------------
34. Mehta to Tilak (1908) (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
(The Moderates address the leader of the new party)
1. Oh Tilak, will this suit our race?
Can your act ever be of grace?
2. To every precedent unknown
Is this new custom, you own;
This has in every city, sway --
Your novel trouble-fraught way.
3. Resounds everywhere freedom's voice
Extirpating our serfdom's joys;
All this is utter madness sure.
And to our men calumny pure.
4. Unto the whites is this nation:
To all others a damnation;
Your advice to urchins and lads
Is all bad, making them but cads.
-Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original forms part of Swadesa Gitankal -- 1908.
----------------
35. mājiṉi eṉṟa ittāli tēcattut tēcāpimāṉi tammāl stāpikkappaṭṭa
'yauvaṉa ittāli' eṉṟa caṅkattilē ceytukoṇṭa piratikkiṉai
mājiṉiyiṉ capatam piratikkiṉai
pēraruṭ kaṭavuḷ tiruvaṭi yāṇai,
      piṟappaḷit temaiyelām purakkum
tāraṇi viḷakkām eṉṉaru nāṭṭiṉ
      tavappeya rataṉmicai yāṇai
pāraven tuyarkaḷ tāyttiru nāṭṭiṉ
      paṇikkeṉap palavitat tuḻaṉṟa
vīrar, namnāṭu vāḻkeṉa vīḻnta
      viḻumiyōr tiruppeya rāṇai.
īcaṉiṅ keṉakkum eṉṉuṭaṉ piṟantōr
      yāvarkkum iyaṟkaiyiṉ aḷitta
tēcamiṉ puṟuvāṉ eṉakkavaṉ paṇitta
      cīruya raṟaṅkaḷi ṉāṇai.
mācaṟu meṉnaṟ ṟāyiṉaip payanteṉ
      vaḻikkelām uṟaiyuḷām nāṭṭiṉ
ācaiyiṅ kevarkkum iyaṟkaiyā maṉṟō
      attakai yaṉpiṉmī tāṇai.
tīyaṉa purital muṟaitavi ruṭaimai,
      cemmaitīr araciyal, anīti
āyavaṟ ṟeṉṉañ ciyaṟkaiyiṉ eytum
      arumpakai yataṉmicai yāṇai
tēyamoṉ ṟaṟṟēṉ naṟkuṭik kuriya
      urimaikaḷ ciṟiteṉu millēṉ,
tūyacī ruṭaittām cutantirat tuvacam
      tuḷaṅkilā nāṭṭiṭaip piṟantēṉ.
maṟṟai nāṭṭavarmuṉ niṉṟiṭum pōḻtu
      maṇṭumeṉ veṭkatti ṉāṇai.
muṟṟiya vīṭu peṟukeṉap paṭaippuṟṟu
      acceyal muṭittiṭa valimai
aṟṟatāl maṟukum eṉṉuyirk kataṉil
      ārnta pērāvali ṉāṇai.
naṟṟavam puriyap piṟanta tāyiṉumin
      nalaṉaṟu maṭimaiyiṉ kuṇattāl.
valiyiḻan tirukkum eṉṉuyir kataṉkaṇ
      vaḷarntiṭum ācaimī tāṇai.
malivuṟu ciṟappiṉ emmuṭai muṉṉōr
      māṇpataṉ niṉaiviṉmī tāṇai.
melivuṭaṉ innāḷ yāṅkaḷ vīḻntirukkum
      vīḻcciyi ṉuṇarccimī tāṇai.
polivuṟu putalvar tūkkiṉi liṟantum
      puṉciṟaik kaḷattiṭai yaḻintum
vēṟṟu nāṭukaḷil avar turat tuṇṭum
      meykulain tiṟantumē paṭutal
āṟṟa kilārāy emmaru nāṭṭiṉ
      aṉṉaimār aḻuṅkaṇī rāṇai.
māṟṟala reṅkaḷ kōṭiyark kiḻaikkum
      vakukkoṇāt tuyarkaḷi ṉāṇai.
ēṟṟa ivvāṇai yaṉaittumēṟ koṇṭē
      yāṉceyuñ capataṅkaḷ ivaiyē.
kaṭavuḷin nāṭṭiṟ kīntatōr puṉitak
      kaṭṭaḷai taṉṉiṉum ataṉait
tiṭaṉuṟa niṟuva muyalutal maṟṟit
      tēcattē piṟantavark kellām
uṭaṉuṟu kaṭamai yākumeṉ patiṉum
      ūṉṟiya namputal koṇṭum
taṭanila micaiyōr cātiyai iṟaivaṉ
      camaikeṉap paṇippaṉēl atutāṉ.
camaitaluk kuriya tiṟamaiyum ataṟkut
      tantuḷa ṉeṉpatai yaṟintum
amaiyumat tiṟamai jaṉaṅkaḷaic cārum
      aṉṉavar tamakkeṉat tāmē
tamaiyala tevarkaḷ tuṇaiyu millātu
      tammarun tiṟamaiyaic celuttal
cumaiyeṉap poṟuppiṉ ceyattiṉuk katuvē
      cūḻcciyām eṉpatai yaṟintum,
karumamuñ conta nalattiṉaic ciṟitum
      karutiṭā taḷittalun tāṉē
tarumamām eṉṟum, oṟṟumai yōṭu
      taḷarvilāc cintaṉai koḷalē
perumaikoḷ valiyām eṉṟumē maṉattiṟ
      peyarntiṭā uṟutimēṟ koṇṭum,
arumaicāl capata mivaipuri kiṉṟēṉ
      āṇaika ḷaṉaittu muṟkoṇṭē.
eṉṉuṭaṉotta tarumattai yēṟṟār
      iyaintaiv vālipar capai kkē
taṉṉuṭal, poruḷum, āviyu mellām
      tattamā vaḻaṅkiṉēṉ; eṅkaḷ
poṉṉuyar nāṭṭai oṟṟumai yuṭaittāyc
      cutantiram pūṇṭatu vāki
iṉṉumōr nāṭṭiṉ cārvila tākik
      kuṭiyara ciyaṉṟatā yilaka.
ivaruṭaṉ yāṉum iṇaṅkiyē yeṉṟum
      ituvalāṟ piṟatoḻi lilaṉāyt
tavamuṟu muyaṟci ceytiṭak kaṭavēṉ.
      cantatañ colliṉāl, eḻuttāl,
avamaṟu ceykai yataṉiṉāl iyalum
      aḷavellām emmava rinta
navamuṟu capaiyi ṉoruperuṅ karuttai
      naṉkitaṉ aṟintiṭap purivēṉ.
uyarumin nōkkam niṟaivuṟa iṇakkam
      oṉṟutāṉ mārkkameṉ patuvum
ceyamnilai yākac ceytiṭaṟ kaṟamē
      ciṟantatōr mārkkameṉ patuvum,
peyarvara eṅkaḷ nāṭṭiṉar maṉattiṟ
      pēṇumā ṟiyaṟṟiṭak kaṭavēṉ,
ayaloru capaiyi liṉṟutō ṟeṉṟum
      amaintiṭā tiruntiṭak kaṭavēṉ.
eṅkaḷnāṭ ṭorumai eṉṉoṭuṅ kuṟikkum
      iccapait talaivarā yiruppōr
taṅkaḷāk kiṉaika ḷaṉaittaiyum paṇintu
      talaikkoḷaṟ keṉṟumē kaṭavēṉ,
iṅkeṉa tāvi māyntiṭu mēṉum
      ivarpaṇi veḷiyiṭā tiruppēṉ
tuṅkamār ceyalāṟ pōtaṉai yālum
      iyaṉṟiṭun tuṇaiyivark kaḷippēṉ.
iṉṟum ennāḷum ivaiceyat tavaṟēṉ
      meyyitu, meyyitu; ivaṟṟai
eṉṟumē tavaṟu yiḻaippaṉēl eṉṉai
      īcaṉār nācamē purika.
aṉṟiyum makkaḷ veṟutteṉai ikaḻka
      acattiyap pātakañ cūḻka
niṉṟatī yeḻuvāy narakattiṉ vīḻntu
      nittamyā ṉuḻaluka maṉṉō!
vēṟu
pēci niṉṟa perumpira tikkiṉai
māci lātu niṟaivuṟum vaṇṇamē
āci kūṟi yaruḷu! ēḻaiyēṟku
īcaṉ eṉṟum itayat tilakiyē.-
-------------
35. Mazzini's Vow (1908) (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
1. I swear by the feet divine of the God
Of great grace; I swear by the austere name
Of my nation--a lamp unto the world--,
That gave birth to us and nourished us all;
I swear by the lofty ones who perished
Hailing divine motherland of heroes,
In whose cause they did in a thousand ways
Suffer excruciating cruelties.
2. I swear by those lofty dharmas famous
Ordained on me by God that the nation
Which He gave so naturally to me
And my brethren may exult in delight.
Is it not but nature that one doth love
The nation thar gave one, one's own mother
And serves as the home of one's progeny?
By such love I do take this solemn oath.
3. I swear by the hostility I bear
By nature, towards evil-doing vile,
Improper acquisition, misrule base,
Injustice and wrongs of similar kind.
Deprived of nation and the least of rights
To noble clanship and citizenship
I am condemned to be born in a country
Bereft of the banner pure, of freedom.
4. I swear by the shame that wells up in me
When I stand before other countrymen;
I swear by the great longing of my life
Which languishes without strength to achieve
The Bliss of Release to seek which alone
My life was with an embodiment blest.
Though born to perform the goodly tapas
By reason of the slave's mentality
5. My life is grown effete; but its desire
Doth swell; by that soaring desire I swear.
I swear by the memoried majesty
Of my forbears of abundant renown.
I swear by the very downfall to which
We are this day so weakly subjected.
Glorious sons perish at the gallows;
They wallow in vile incarceration;
6. They are alas exiled to other lands
Where they perish utterly mortified.
At this the Mother of our dear country
Weeps and weeps; I swear by her sacred tears.
I swear by the unexampled sorrows
Caused by our enemies to us--millions.
You have heard me swear and to these I add
These, my further solemn obligations.
7. Greater than the holy commandment of God
Issued to this country, and greater than
The indispensable duties cast on
All men born in this country to perform
God's fiat, is the knowledge that if God should
Order the creation of a race--firm
In faith and resolute--, o'er this strong earth,
That race can flourish only if it is
8. Fully aware of the divine will which
At its creation infused it with skill
To flourish; it should again know further
That its stability depends upon
Its people and that they themselves, without,
From others seeking help, should ply their skill,
Bearing well their responsibility,
Which alone, be it known, will spell success.
9. To perform duty and to give freely
Not caring a little for petty self
Are dharma; a spirit of union fired
By unflagging resolution marks strength
That is glorious; with these principles
Indelibly imprinted in my mind,
I hereby swear these oaths, solemn and rare,
Well remembering all the vows I have made.
10. To this "Society of the Young" wrought by
The youths who are wedded to my dharma,
I dedicate in truth and gift away
My life, my body and possessions all,
That our golden country may by power
Of union and freedom ever flourish
As a republic, truly pursuing
The great policy of non-alignment.
11. Companied with these lads, let me always
Work, with no fault to mar my endeavours;
I will never think of any other work.
For sure, always, by word of mouth, by writing,
And by deed from blemish totally free,
To the extent which is possible for me,
I will explicate the great ideal
Of this novel society to our men.
12. For fruition of this lofty ideal
The only way is unity; to stablish
Triumph and to make it endure for eter,
Dharma alone is the goodly way true;
I will strive to imprint these indelibly
In the tablets of the hearts of our men.
Any society other than this--ours --,
Never will I at any point of time join.
13. This society marks our iand's unity;
I will e'er abide by all the behests
Of its leaders in strict obedience
And aye, in wilful veneration.
Even if I were to forfeit my life
I will not publish their secret commands.
By righteous practice and precept also
I will render them my very best help.
14. From this day and always, I'll not omit
To do these; I swear, I swear; if ever
I should from this course deviate at all,
May the Almighty annihilate me!
May people too condemn and contemn me!
May evil false surround me for ever!
May I into flaming inferno fall
And suffer perdition everlasting!
May the Lord -- God abide in me
And keep me steadfast by His Grace
In these solemn obligations
To which I have willingly sworn.
-Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original forms part of Swadesa Gitankal -- 1908. The
poem was composed at the request of the great patriot V.O.Chidam baram
Pillai.
----------------
36. veḷḷaikkāra viñc turai kūṟṟu
rākam-taṇṭakam tāḷam-āti
nāṭṭi leṅkum cutantira vāñcaiyai
      nāṭṭiṉāy;-kaṉal-mūṭṭiṉāy;
vāṭṭi yuṉṉai maṭakkic ciṟaikkuḷḷē
      māṭṭuvēṉ;-vali-kāṭṭuvēṉ. (nāṭṭi)
kūṭṭaṅ kūṭi vantē mātarameṉṟu
      kōṣittāy;-emait tūṣittāy;
ōṭṭamnāṅkaḷeṭukka veṉṟē kappal
      ōṭṭiṉāy; poruḷ-īṭṭiṉāy. (nāṭṭi)
kōḻaip paṭṭa jaṉaṅkaḷuk kuṇmaikaḷ
      kūṟiṉāy;-caṭṭam-mīṟiṉāy;
ēḻaippaṭ ṭiṅku iṟattal iḻiveṉṟē
      ēciṉāy;-vīram-pēciṉāy (nāṭṭi)
aṭimaip pēṭikaḷ tammai maṉitarkaḷ
      ākkiṉāy;-puṉmai-pōkkiṉāy;
miṭimai pōtum namakkeṉ ṟiruntōrai
      mīṭṭiṉāy;-ācai-ūṭṭiṉāy (nāṭṭi)
toṇṭoṉ ṟētoḻi lākkoṇ ṭiruntōrait
      tūṇṭiṉāy; pukaḻ-vēṇṭiṉāy
kaṇṭa kaṇṭatoḻil kaṟka mārkkaṅkaḷ
      kāṭṭiṉāy;-cōrvai-ōṭṭiṉāy. (nāṭṭi)
eṅkum intacuya rājya viruppattai
      ēviṉāy;-vitai-tūviṉāy;
ciṅkam ceyyum toḻilaic ciṟumuyal
      ceyyavō?-nīṅkaḷ-uyyavō?- (nāṭṭi)
cuṭṭu vīḻttiyē putti varuttiṭac
      colluvēṉ:-kuttik-kolluvēṉ;
taṭṭip pēcuvō ruṇṭō?ciṟaikkuḷḷē
      taḷḷuvēṉ:-paḻi-koḷḷuvēṉ. (nāṭṭi)
------------
36. An Englishman to an Indian Patriot (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
1. You have roused the passion for liberty
Throughout the country; fire kindled burns, see.
I will cause you suffer travail in jail,
Can aught ever my power countervail?
2. With your crowds, 'Vande Mataram' you cry,
Thus it is aye, you choose us to decry;
Building ships you cause them ply over sea
To amass wealth immense and make us flee.
3. To the timid, truths you inculcated
And against laws of land militated;
'To perish impoverished is disgrace'
You cried and spoke with valour us to outface.
4. The eunuch slaves into men you transformed,
No longer would they be the old deformed;
You redeemed them content with indigence;
Firing them with greed of magnificence.
5. The servile workers you have incited;
To seek glory great you have ignited.
The way to undertakings you have shown
Killing lassitude and seeking renown.
6. Passion for Swaraj everywhere you lit,
Seeds of freedom you sowed for your benefit.
Can a rabbit do what the lion can? Can you hope to survive, sect and
clan?
7. I will shoot you, din into your good sense,
I'll kill you and cause you troubles immense,
Who can dare defy me? You, will I jail;
Wreak vengeance; nought over me can prevail.
- Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original forms part of Janma Bhumi -- 1909. This and the
following poem, according to the "Native Paper Reports" appeared in
India dated 4-4-1908. The Reports contain a line by line transla tion of
both the poems. They were again translated during the proceed ings of
the Ashe murder case.
The titles given to this and the following poem by Bharati are
respectively as follows:
1. What Collector Wynch says to Sri Chidambaran Pillai.
2. The reply by Sri Chidambaram Pillai to Collector Wynch.
----------------
37. ‘kalekṭar viṉcukku srī citamparampiḷḷai colliya maṟumoḻi’
conta nāṭṭiṟ pararkkaṭimai ceytē
      tuñciṭōm -- iṉi -- añciṭōm;
enta nāṭṭiṉum inta anītikaḷ
      ēṟkumō? -- teyvam -- pārkkumō?       1
vantē mātaram eṉṟuyir pōmvarai
      vāḻttuvōm -- muṭi -- tāḻttuvōm;
enta māruyi raṉṉaiyaip pōṟṟutal
      īṉamō? -- ava -- māṉamō?       2
poḻutellām eṅkaḷ celvaṅ koḷḷaikoṇṭu
      pōkavō? -- nāṅkaḷ -- cākavō?
aḻutu koṇṭirup pōmō? āṇpiḷḷaikaḷ nāṅkaḷ
      allamō? -- uyir -- vellamō?       3
nāṅkaḷ muppatu kōṭi jaṉaṅkaḷum
      nāykaḷō -- paṉṟic -- cēykaḷō?
nīṅkaḷ maṭṭum maṉitarkaḷōitu
      nītamō? -- piṭi -- vātamō?       4
pārata tattiṭai aṉpu celuttutal
      pāpamō? -- maṉas -- tāpamō?
kūṟu eṅkaḷ miṭimaiyait tīrppatu
      kuṟṟamō -- itil -- ceṟṟamō?       5
oṟṟumai vaḻi yoṉṟē vaḻiyeṉpatu
      ōrntiṭṭōm -- naṉku -- tērntiṭṭōm
maṟṟu nīṅkaḷ ceyyuṅkoṭu maikkelām
      malaivuṟōm -- cittam -- kalaivuṟōm.       6
cataiyait tuṇṭutuṇ ṭākkiṉum uṉṉeṇṇam
      cāyumō? -- jīvaṉ -- ōyumō?
itayat tuḷḷē ilaṅku mahāpakti
      ēkumō? -- neñcam -- vēkumō?       7
---------------
37. The Reply of the Indian Patriot to the Englishman (1909) (Thiru
T.N.Ramachandran )
1. Slaves to aliens we will no longer be
In our land; we will be from fear free;
No nation will your injustice endure,
Will God to this be a witness for sure?
2. 'Vande Mataram' we will hail till we die;
Thus will we ever our Mother glorify.
Is it sin to hail Mother as life dear?
Will dishonour to our worship adhere?
3. Are we to suffer your constant plunder
Which will in days to come, our death engender?
Are we not inen? Will we merely weep?
Will we ever live cheap? Are we but sheep?
4, Are the thirty crores of us curs and dogs?
Are we the progeny of pigs and hogs?
Think you only to be men? Is this fair Your stubborn stand of a mere
doctrinaire?
5. Is love of Mother-Bharat a great sin?
Can this be a matter for chagrin?
We 'll end poverty: Is this with crime fraught?
Can you to this grow angry, all distraught?
6. That is the true way that leads to unity,
We have known this to be a certainty.
Your cruelty will not us distay.
We will stand firm for ever, come what may.
7. Us you may hack and whack, yet your desire
Will not fruit bear; never will quench our life's fire.
Great Bhakti is indeed our strength inner,
It will to our broken hearts minister.
-Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: See Note for 36.
----------------
38. eṉṟu taṇiyuminta cutantira tākam?
srī kiruṣṇa stōttiram
kavikaḷ
rākam kamās, āti tāḷam
eṉṟu taṇiyum inta cutantira tākam
eṉṟu maṭiyum eṅkaḷ aṭimaiyiṉ mōkam
eṉṟu ematu aṉṉai kai vilaṅkukaḷ pōkum
eṉṟu ematu iṉṉalkaḷ tīrntu poyyākum
aṉṟoru pāratam ākkavan tōṉē!
āriyar vāḻviṉai ātarip pōṉē!
veṉṟi taruntuṇai niṉṉaru ḷaṉṟō?
meyyaṭi yōmiṉṉum vāṭutal naṉṟō?
pañcamum nōyum niṉ meyyaṭiyārkkō
pāriṉil mēṉmaikaḷ vēriniyārkkō
tañcam aṭainta piṉ kai viṭalāmō
tāy untaṉ kuḻantaiyai taḷḷiṭapōmō
añcaleṉ ṟaruḷ ceyuṅ kaṭamai yillāyō?
āriya! nīyumniṉ aṟammaṟan tāyō?
veñceyal arakkarai vīṭṭiṭu vōṉō!
vīra cikāmaṇi! āriyar kōṉē!
----------
38. Thirst for Freedom (1909)
1. When will this thirst for freedom slake?
When will our love of slavery die?
When will our Mother's fetters break?
When will our tribulations cease?
2. Lord! Architect of the Bharat war,
And sustainer of Aryan life!
Lead, lead us, to victory!
Is it right we remain slaves?
3. Are famine and disease alone our share?
For whom, then, are the laurels and fruits?
Would you abandon us, your suppliants?
Could the mother cast her child aside?
4. Brave Warrior! Aryan Lord!
Destroyer of the demon-race,
Where's your dharma? Is not your duty
To revive us, and chase Fear away?
- Dr. Prema Nandakumar
Note: The Tamil original forms part of Janma Bhumi.'
From the "Native Paper Reports" of the British Government of India, we
learn that the Tamil original appeared in India dated 7-3-1908. The
Reports also contain a translation of the first lines of the poem under
the heading, "Exhortation to Sree Krishna."
On 9-3-1908 Bharati sang this song at the meeting held in Triplicane
beach to celebrate the release of Bipin Chandra Pal from imprison ment.
A translation of this song was marked as an Exhibit in the Ashe murder
case.
--------------
39. āriyar kaṭciṅ kamaikuṇam palavē
kuṇam pala
āriyar kaṭkiṅ kamaikuṇam palavē.
avaiyē,
muṉṉōr payiṉṟa muṟaimaiyiṉaṉmaiyaip
piṉṉōr tamaveṉap pēṇuta loṉṟē,
tāṉ piṟantiṭṭa takaipeṟu nāṭṭiṟ
piṉṉiṭā vaṉpaip peṟṟiṭa loṉṟē,
avarpeṟum pēriṉai yarumakaṟ kiṭṭu
vāymaṇantiṭavē vaḻaṅkuta loṉṟē,
iṟputa mākara vakaiceya loṉṟē.
----------------
39. Aryan Traits (2-5-1908). (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
Many indeed are the Aryan traits;
To embrace for sure, the practised virtue
Of their ancients as their own, is one of them.
To come by a love unexcellable
For their Motherland is one such trait.
To name their progeny after the great
And mouth such names in ecstasy, is one.
To guard the home from aliens too, is one.
- Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original was published in India. Bharati wrote an
article on Rani Lakshmi Bhai. The article concluded with this poem.
---------------
40. pāratatēviyiṉ tiruttacāṅkam
nēricai veṇpā
nāmam (kāmpōti)
paccai maṇikkiḷiyē! pāviyeṉak kēyōkap
piccai yaruḷiyatāy pēruraiyāy! - iccakattil
pūraṇamā ñāṉap pukaḻviḷakkai nāṭṭuvitta
pāratamā tēviyeṉap pāṭu.
nāṭu (vacantā)
tēṉār moḻikkiḷḷāy tēviyeṉak kāṉanta
māṉāḷ poṉ ṉāṭṭai aṟivippāy! - vāṉāṭu
pērimaya veṟpumutal peṇkumari īṟākum
āriyanā ṭeṉṟē aṟi.
nakar (maṇiraṅku)
iṉmaḻalaip paiṅkiḷiyē! eṅkaḷ uyirāṉāḷ
naṉmaiyuṟa vāḻum nakaretukol? - ciṉmayamē
nāṉeṉ ṟaṟinta naṉiperiyōrk kiṉṉamutu
tāṉeṉṟa kācit talam.
āṟu (curuṭṭi)
vaṇṇak kiḷi! vantē mātarameṉ ṟōtuvarai
iṉṉalaṟak kāppā ḷiyāṟuraiyāy! - naṉṉarceyat
tāṉpōm vaḻiyelām taṉmamoṭu poṉviḷaikkum
vāṉpōnta kaṅkaiyeṉa vāḻttu.
malai (kāṉaṭā)
malai (kāṉaṭā)
cōlaip pacuṅkiḷiyē! toṉmaṟaikaḷ nāṉkuṭaiyāḷ
vālai vaḷarum malaikūṟāy! - ñālattuḷ
veṟpoṉṟum īṭilatāy viṇṇil muṭitākkum
poṟpoṉṟu veḷḷaip poruppu.
ūrti (taṉyāci)
cīrum ciṟappumuyar celvamumō reṇṇaṟṟāḷ
ūrum puravi uraitattāy! tēriṉ
parimicaiyūr vāḷallaḷ pāraṉaittum añcum
arimicaiyē ūrvāḷ avaḷ.
paṭai (mukāri)
karuṇai yuruvāṉāḷ kāynteḻuṅkāṟ kiḷḷāy
cerunaraivīḻt tumpaṭaiyeṉ ceppāy! - porupavar
mēltaṇṇaḷiyāl vīḻātu, vīḻiṉ takaipparitām
tiṇṇamuṟu vāṉkulicam tēṟu.
muracu (ceñcuruṭṭi)
ācai marakatamē! aṉṉai tiru muṉṟiliṭai
ōcai vaḷarmuracam ōtuvāy! - pēcukavō
cattiyamē, ceyka tarumamē eṉṟolicey
muttitarum vēta muracu.
tār (pilakari)
vārāy iḷañcukamē! vantippārk keṉṟumiṭar
tārāḷ puṉaiyupaṇit tārkūṟāy! - cērārai
muṟṟāk kuṟunakaiyāl muṟṟuvittut tāṉoḷirvāḷ
poṟṟā maraittār puṉaintu.
koṭi (kētāram)
koṭippavaḷa vāykkiḷḷāy! cūttiramum tīṅkum
maṭippavaḷiṉ velkoṭitāṉ maṟṟeṉ? - aṭippaṇivār
naṉṟārat tīyār nalivuṟavē vīcumoḷi
kuṉṟā vayirak koṭi.
--------------
40. Dasanka of Bharata Devi (10-10-1908). (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
1. Parrot green and gem-like!
Who did bless this sinner
With the boon of Yoga?
Declare her name, the Mother's
It is Bharat Devi!
Hail her in 'solemn verse
Who has on earth stablished
The famous lamp unique
Of perfect wisdom great.
2. Parrot of honied words
Devi to me is bliss.
Pray declare unto me
Her great golden country.
Let that be known to you As the Arya-country
From sky-capped Himachal
To Kanyakumari.
3. O parrot babbling sweet
She in truth is our life.
What indeed is the town
That holds her blessed home?
It is Varanasi --
True nectar to the wise
Who know them to be
God Steept in godly wisdom--,
4. O my comely parrot!
Them she frees from trouble
And protects, who ever chant
"Vande Mataram".
What may her river be?
'Tis supernal Ganga
That irrigating flows
With piety and gold.
5. Green parrot of Eden
Hers are the Vedas four,
Eternal is her youth.
Point to me her mountain.
Know that for sure, to be
The one of unsunned snow,
The one that peerless stands
The very sky piercing.
6. O parrot, winged wonder!
Beyond reckoning she's
Great, glorious, wealthy.
What courser does she ride?
Know this to be the truth:
No car of steeds, she rides,
She does a lion ride.
The terror of this earth.
7. She is mercy incarnate
Yet, oh pretty parrot,
With what weapon does she
Her foes quell, when provoked?
Her mercy prevents her
From wielding the weapon;
But should she wield. Kulis
Sure death to all the foes.
8. Lovely emerald, what drum,
Pray, tell me, resounds there
Fronting Mother's dwelling?
'Tis the drum of Vedas Whose gift is salvation
Hearken to its message:
"For ever speak the truth
And do that which is righteous."
9. Come my tender parrot
Freed are they from sorrows
That ever adore her.
What garland does she wear?
A garland of lotus--
All golden she does wear,
And by her tender smile
Subdues foes, and dazzles,
10. Coral-mouthed parrot!
Sin and evil she quells.
What triumphal flag is hers?
It is that which protects
Them that hail her feet twain
Laying low evil ones;
The Flag of Thunderbolt
Of undiminished lustre!
- Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original appeared in India.
------------------
41. eṅkaḷ tāy
(kāvaṭic cintil āṟumuka vaṭivēlavaṉē eṉṟa meṭṭu)
toṉṟu nikaḻnta taṉaittum uṇarntiṭu
cūḻkalai vāṇarkaḷum - ivaḷ
eṉṟu piṟantavaḷ eṉṟuṇa rāta
iyalpiṉa ḷām eṅkaḷ tāy.
yārum vakuttaṟ kariya pirāyatta
ḷāyiṉu mēyaṅkaḷ tāy - intap
pāruḷen nāḷumōr kaṉṉikai eṉṉap
payiṉṟiṭu vāḷeṅkaḷ tāy.
muppatukōṭi mukamuṭai yāḷuyir
moympuṟa voṉṟuṭaiyāḷ - ivaḷ
ceppu moḻipati ṉeṭṭuṭai yāḷ eṉiṟ
cintaṉai oṉṟuṭaiyāḷ.
nāviṉil vēta muṭaiyavaḷ kaiyil
nalantikaḻ vāḷuṭai yāḷ - taṉai
mēviṉark kiṉṉaruḷ ceypavaḷ tīyarai
vīṭṭiṭu tōḷuṭaiyāḷ.
aṟupatu kōṭi taṭakkaika ḷālum
aṟaṅkaḷ naṭattuvaḷ tāy - taṉaic
ceṟuvatu nāṭi varupava raittukaḷ
ceytu kiṭattuvaḷ tāy.
pūmi yi ṉumpoṟai mikkuṭai yāḷpeṟum
puṇṇiya neñciṉaḷ tāy - eṉil
tōmiḻaip pārmuṉ niṉṟiṭuṅ kāṟkoṭun
turkkai yaṉaiyavaḷ tāy.
kaṟṟaic caṭaimati vaitta tuṟaviyaik
kaitoḻu vāḷeṅkaḷ tāy - kaiyil
oṟṟait tikirikoṇ ṭēḻula kāḷum
oruvaṉai yuntoḻu vāḷ.
yōkatti lēnika raṟṟavaḷ uṇmaiyum
oṉṟeṉa naṉṟaṟi vāḷ - uyar
pōkatti lēyum niṟaintavaḷ eṇṇarum
poṟkuvai tāṉuṭaiyāḷ.
nallaṟam nāṭiya maṉṉarai vāḻtti
nayampuri vāḷeṅkaḷ tāy - avar
allava rāyiṉ avaraivi ḻuṅkippiṉ
āṉantak kūtti ṭuvāḷ.
veṇmai vaḷarima yācalaṉ tanta
viṟaṉmaka ḷāmeṅkaḷ tāy - avaṉ
tiṇmai maṟaiyiṉum tāṉmaṟai yāḷnittañ
cīruṟu vāḷeṅkaḷ tāy.
-------------
41. Our Mother
1. Wher was our Mother born--
Who can hazard a guess?
Not even the learned that discern
What happened in the days of yore.
2. Though our Mother's age
No one can compute,
Alone on earth does she shine
For ever in virgin bloom.
3. Three hundred million
Her faces are;
But all, all of them
Throb with one vibrant life.
4. Eighteen are the languages
That she speaks;
But animating them all
Is only one thought.
5. Vedas are the speech
Of this sword-wielding Lady;
Merciful to her votaries,
She extirpates evil men,
6. Six hundred million
Her hands are;
All of them perform
Only righteous deeds.
7. If vile wretches there are
That seek to subdue her,
She routs them all
And reduces them to pulp.
8. More patient than Earth
Is our Holy Mother;
But before wicked men
She is Durga, the destroyer,
9. She adores the ascetic God
That wears the horned moon on the matted locks.
She worships as well the discus--bearer
That protects the seven Worlds.
10. Peerless in mystic meditation,
She perceives that Truth is One;
She also revels in worldly joys --
This Lady of immense riches.
11. Rulers reputed for
Justice seasoned with mercy
he blesses with boons in plenty
Others she devours and dances in delight.
12. Heroic daughter she is
Of the snow-clad Himavant;
Even if his might should melt away
She will grow from strength to strength.
- Prof. S.Ramakrishnan
Note: The Tamil original appeared in India.
--------------
42. cutantiram
42. Freedom (21-11-1908). (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
Though we sink and die for the cause
For which our fathers shed their blood
Our progeny will be by Freedom fostered
And the great war once begun in its cause
Though destined to meet with many failures
Yet in the end will achieve victory.
- Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original appeared in India. It was prefixed to the essay
called 'The First Attempt' by Bharati. The Tamil version, according to
Bharati, is a free rendering of a verse by Lord Byron. Our poet has
given in prose the meaning of his rendering. It is as follows: "Shedding
blood, though men might die generation after generation, yet the war of
freedom continued by the sons would ultimately end in victory
notwithstanding many failures."
-----------
43. aiya pārata!
ciṟantu niṉṟa cintai yōṭu
      tēya nūṟu veṉṟivaḷ‌
maṟanta virntan‌ nāṭar‌ vantu
      vāḻi coṉṉa pōḻtiṉum‌,
irantu māṇpu! tīra mikka
      ēḻmai koṇṭa pōḻtiṉum‌,
aṟanta lirki lātu niṟkum‌
      aṉṉai veṟṟi koḷkavē! 1
nūṟu kōṭi nūlkaḷ‌ ceytu
      nūṟu tēya vāṇarkaḷ‌
tēṟu nuṇmai koḷla viṅku
      tēṭi vanta nāḷiṉum‌,
māṟu koṇṭu kalvi tēya
      vaṇmai tīrnta nāḷiṉum‌,
īṟu niṟku muṇmai yoṉṟi
      ṟaiñci niṟpaḷ‌ vāḻkavē! 2
villar‌ vāḻvu kuṉṟi yōya
      vīra vāḷu māyavē.
vellu ñāṉam‌ viñci yōrcey‌
      meymmai nūlkaḷ‌ tēyavum‌
collu mivva ṉaittum‌ vēṟu
      cūḻu naṉmai yuntara
valla nūlke ṭātukāppaḷ‌
      vāḻi yaṉṉai vāḻiyē 3
tēva ruṇṇu īṉma runtu
      cērnta kumpa meṉṉavē"
mēvu vārka ṭaṟka ṇuḷḷa
      veḷḷa nīrai yoppavum‌
pāva keñci ṉōcarni tampa
      nittal‌ ceṅva rāyiṉum‌
ōvi lāta celva miṉṉum‌
      ōṅku maṉṉai vāḻkavē! 4
itantarum toḻilkaḷ ceytu‌
      irumpu vikku nalkiṉaḷ‌
patantaraṟ kuriya vāya‌
      paṉma taṅkaḷ nāṭṭiṉaḷ‌
vitampeṟumpal nāṭi ṉarkku‌
      vēṟo ruṇmai tōṟṟavē‌
cutantiratti lācai iṉṟu‌
      tōṟṟi ṉāḷmaṉ vāḻkavē!‌
-------------
43. Victory to Mother (5-12-1908). (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
1. With lofty thoughts soaring high
Mother her triumph registers
Over a hundred nations;
The vanquished, shorn of bravery
Bow before Mother and hail her.
(The wheel of fortune turns alas!)
Mother stands steeped in indigence
Shorn of her heroic majesty.
What though her state be, never does
Great mother, from piety swerve.
May success be Mother's always!
2. Time was when pandits the world over,
-- Authors of millions of great works--,
Came thronging here in longing quest
Of the unique truth ultimate.
(The wheel of fortune turns alas!)
Learning, this day, is on the wane
As patronage has ceased to be.
What though her state be, the
Mother For ever adores that which is
The Residue of Residues,
The Ultimate Truth Immortal!
May Mother flourish for ever!
3. Gone is the life of bowmen great,
Gone is the day of heroic sword,
Gone are the great scriptures of truth
Wrought by men of excelling wisdom.
All these to resuscitate
That benefits may be restored
She will provide what is needed,
By sàving that work that saves.
May Mother flourish for ever!
4. Even when sinners daily exploit
And denude her of her great wealth,
Like a jar of nectar --drink divine --,
That suffers no diminution
Like the waters of ocean-streams,
She yicids eternal wealth endless
Much sought after by so many.
May Mother flourish for ever!
5. She devised crafts and granted them
To this world to thrive in well.
Many religions she revealed
To usher in beatitudes;
To envision a different truth
For multitudinous nations
She hath this day fostered a love
So great and grand for Liberty! May
Mother flourish for ever!
- Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original appeared in India. Bharati explains Valla nul
occur
ring in stanza 3 as the Upanishad or the Gita.
--------------
44. svatantira tākam
cutantirap payir
taṇṇīrviṭ ṭō vaḷarttōm? carvēcā! ippayiraik
kaṇṇīrāṟ kāttōm; karukat tiruvuḷamō?
eṇṇamelām neyyāka emmuyiri ṉuḷvaḷarnta
vaṇṇa viḷakkiḵtu maṭiyat tiruvuḷamō?
ōrāyira varuṭam ōyntu kiṭanta piṉṉar
vārātu pōlavanta māmaṇiyait tōṟpōmō?
tarmamē vellumēṉum cāṉṟōrcol poyyāmō?
karma viḷaivukaḷ yām kaṇṭatelām pōtātō?
mēlōrkaḷ veñciṟaiyil vīḻntu kiṭappatuvum
nūlōrkaḷ cekkaṭiyil nōvatuvuṅ kāṇkilaiyō?
eṇṇaṟṟa nallōr itayam puḻuṅkiyiru
kaṇṇaṟṟa cēypōṟ kalaṅkuvatuṅ kāṇkilaiyō?
mātaraiyum makkaḷaiyum vaṉkaṇmai yāṟpirintu
kāta liḷaiñar karuttaḻital kāṇāyō?
entāy! nī tanta iyaṟporuḷe lāmiḻantu
nontārkku nīyaṉṟi nōvaḻippār yāruḷarō?
iṉpac cutantiramniṉ iṉṉaruḷāṟ peṟṟataṉṟō?
aṉpaṟṟa mākkaḷ ataippaṟittāṟ kāvāyō?
vāṉmaḻai yillaiyeṉṟāl vāḻvuṇṭō ?entai cuyā
tīṉamemak killai yeṉṟāl tīṉaretu ceyvōmē?
neñcakattē poyyiṉṟi nērntatelām nī taruvāy
vañcakamō eṅkaḷ maṉattūymai kāṇāyō?
poykkō uṭalum poruḷuyirum vāṭṭukiṟōm?
poykkō tīrātu pulampit tuṭippatumē?
niṉporuṭṭu niṉṉaruḷāl niṉṉurimaiyām kēṭṭāl,
eṉporuṭṭu nītāṉ iraṅkā tiruppatuvō?
iṉṟu putitāy irakkiṉṟō mō? muṉṉōr
aṉṟukoṭu vāḻnta arumaiyelām ōrāyō?
nīyum aṟamum nilattiruttal meyyāṉāl
ōyumuṉar eṅkaḷukkiv ōrvaram nī nalkutiyē”
---------------
44. Freedom Plant (19-12-1908). (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
i. With tears, not water, this plant we reared:
Is it your pleasure, Lord, it should be seared?
2. A lustrous lamp with our life's ghee fed:
Is it your pleasure it should be dead?
3. After years a thousand there came on a day
A diamond most dazzling: shall we throw it away?
4. Virtue will win --- is it a lie of the sages?
Our suffering not enough through all these ages?
5. Can't you see heroes and men of letters
Slaving at mills, rotting in fetters?
6. Countless good ones, their hearts stifled,
Blinded, bewildered, of all things rifled?
7. By baleful tyranny kept separated
Fathers from families, lovers ill-fated?
8. O Father, we have abused all that you gave us:
Who but you now to heal and save us?
9. Isn't sweet freedom the best of your boons?
Will you not guard it against unkind baboons?
10. Can life exist if there is no rain?
Without freedom are not all things vain?
11. Merciful, generous, can you not see
How our hearts are of falsehood free?
12. Is it in vain our substance we spend?
Torture our bodies, moan without end?
13. When for you and through you we fight for your right,
How comes it you cannot pity our plight?
14. Is this a new thing to which we aspire?
Didn't our forefathers have all we desire?
15. If virtue and you abide as they say
Grant us this one gift in our day!
-Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original appeared in India.
-------------
45. pāla kaṅkātara tilakam
nāma kaṭkup peruntoṇ ṭiyaṟṟippaṉ
      ṉāṭṭi ṉōrtaṅ kalaiyilu mavvavar
tāma kattu viyappap payiṉṟoru
      cātti rakkaṭa leṉṉa viḷaṅkuvōṉ;
māma kaṭkup piṟappiṭa mākamuṉ
      vāḻntin nāḷil vaṟaṇṭayar pāratap
pūma kaṭku maṉantuṭit tēyivaḷ
      puṉmai pōkkuva leṉṟa viratamē.       1
neñca kattōr kaṇattilu nīṅkilāṉ
      nīta mēyo ruruveṉat tōṉṟiṉōṉ
vañca kattaip pakaiyeṉak koṇṭatai
      māykku māṟu maṉatiṟ kotikkiṉṟōṉ
tuñcu maṭṭumip pārata nāṭṭiṟkē
      toṇṭi ḻaikkat tuṇintavar yāvarum
añce ḻuttiṉaic caivar moḻitalpōl
      aṉpo ṭōtum peyaruṭai yāriyaṉ.       2
vīra mikka marāṭṭiyar ātara
      mēvip pārata tēvitirunutal
āravaitta tilaka meṉattikaḻ
      aiya ṉallicaip pālakaṅ kātaraṉ
cēra larkku niṉaikkavun tīyeṉa
      niṉṟa veṅkaḷ tilaka muṉivarkōṉ
cira ṭikkama lattiṉai vāḻttuvēṉ
      cintai tūymai peṟukeṉak cintittē.       3
----------
45. On Tilak Maharaj (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
1. To Saraswati he had service great
Rendered and mastered other nations' arts
At which the great masters are struck with awe;
Verily he is the sea of sastras,
Our Bharat, once Saraswati's birth-place
Is this day a barren desert become;
Heart-sore at Her plight, he has bound himself
To a vow, to chase the meanness away.
2. In the heart of Bharat ever shrined is he
Who of justness is an embodiment;
An eternal foe to deception vile,
To extirpate it his heart doth ever rage.
They that have resolved to serve Bharat-land
Till the very last moment of their life,
Hold fast to this Arya's name and chant it
In love, as Saivites the sacred pentad.
3. Dear are the heroic Marathis
To Bharat-Devi who wears the Tilak.
Like that very Tilak is he, the famed one,
Bal Gangadhar Tilak, the Maharaj,
A flaming fire is he to the hostile,
Our Tilak the peerless Prince of Munis.
I hail his glorious lotus-feet twain
That I may come by Thought immaculate.
-- Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: M.V.Easwara lyer published a biography on Bal Gangadhar Tilak in
1908. This work contains the Tamil original. Tilak was the political
guru of our poet.
----------------
46. kōkalē cāmiyār pāṭal
kaḷakkamuṟu mārli naṭam kaṇṭukoṇṭa taruṇam
      kaṭaicciṟiyēṉ uḷampūttuk kāyttatoru kāytāṉ
viḷakkamuṟap paḻuttiṭumō vempuyutirn tiṭumō
      vempātu viḻiṉumeṉṟaṉ krattilakap paṭumō
vaḷarttapaḻaṅ karcaṉeṉṟākuraṅkukavarntiṭumō
      maṟṟiṅṅaṉ āṭciceyum aṇilkaṭittu viṭumō
tuḷakkamaṟa yāṉpeṟṟil kuṇṇuvaṉō vallāl
      toṇṭaivikku mō. ētum collari tāmē.
-------------------
46. Gokhale Swamy's Song (2-1-1909).
While witnessing the flawed dance of Morley
In poor me effloresced and grew a fruit; Would it grow ripe or perish
premature?
Should it grow full ripe, would it still reach me? Would it be snatched
by Curzon the monkey?
Would squirrel-rulers nibble it away? Could I get it and eat it with
relish?
Would hiccough beset me? Who could predict?
-Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original was published in India.
-----------------
47. kavitaik kātali
vārāy!kavitaiyām maṇippeyark kātali!
paṉṉāḷ paṉmati āṇṭupala kaḻintaṉa,
niṉṉaruḷ vataṉam nāṉ nēruṟak kaṇṭē
antanāḷ nīyeṉai aṭimaiyāk koḷa,yām
māṉiṭar kuḻāttiṉ maṟaivuṟat taṉiyiruntu
eṇṇilā iṉpattu iruṅkaṭal tiḷaittōm;
kalantuyām poḻiliṭaik kaḷittavan nāṭkaḷiṟ
pūmpoḻiṟ kuyilkaḷiṉ iṉkural pōṉṟa
tīṅkuralu ṭaittōr puḷḷiṉait terintilēṉ;
malariṉat tuṉtaṉ vāḷviḻi yoppa 10
nilaviya toṉṟiṉai nērntilēṉ;kuḷirpuṉaṟ
cuṉaikaḷil uṉmaṇic coṟkaḷ pōl taṇṇiya
nīruṭait taṟikiṟēṉ;niṉṉoṭu tamiyaṉāy
nīyē uyireṉat teyvamum nīyeṉa
niṉṉaiyē pēṇi neṭunāḷ pōkkiṉēṉ.
vāṉakat tamutam maṭuttiṭum pōḻtu
maṟṟata ṉiṭaiyōr vañcakat toṭumuḷ
vīḻntiṭait toṇṭaiyil vētaṉai ceytaṉa.
niṉṉoṭu kaḷittu niṉaiviḻan tirunta
eṉaittuyarp paṭuttavan teytiya tulakiṟ 20
koṭiyaṉa yāvuḷum koṭiyatām miṭimai
aṭinā muḷḷiṉai ayalciṟi tēkik
kaḷaintu piṉvantu kāṇpoḻuta aiyakō!”
maṟaintatu teyva maruntuṭaip poṟkuṭam
miṭimainōy tīrppāṉ vīṇartam mulakap
puṉtoḻil oṉṟu pōṟṟutum eṉpāḷ
teṉticaik kaṇṇoru ciṟṟūrk kiṟaivaṉām
tiruntiya oruvaṉait tuṇaiyeṉap pukuntu,avaṉ
paṇiceya icaintēṉ,patakinī! eṉṉaip
pirintumaṟ ṟakaṉṟaṉai pēcoṇā niṉṉaruḷ. 30
iṉpamat taṉaiyum iḻantunāṉ uḻaṉṟēṉ,
ciṉṉāḷ kaḻintapiṉ -yāteṉac ceppukēṉ!
niṉṉoṭu vāḻnta niṉaippumē tēyntatu.
kataiyilōr muṉivaṉ kaṭiyatāñ cāpa
viḷaiviṉāl paṉṟiyā vīḻntiṭu muṉṉart
taṉmaka ṉiṭai “eṉ taṉayanī yāṉpulaip
paṉṟiyām pōtu pārttunil lātē!
viraivilōr vāḷkoṭu veṟuppuṭai yavvuṭarla
tuṇitteṉaik koṉṟu tolaittaluṉ kaṭaṉām.
pāvamiṅ killaiyeṉ paṇippiḵ tākaliṉ!” 40
tātaicoṟku iḷaiñaṉ taḷarvoṭum iṇaṅkiṉāṉ.
muṉivaṉum paṉ ṟiyā muṭintapiṉ,maintaṉ
muṉṉavaṉ kūṟiya morīyiṉai niṉaintum,
irumpukaḻ muṉivaṉukkuṉa iḻiyatā mivvuṭal
amaintatu kaṇṭuneñ caḻaṉṟiṭal koṇṭum.
vāḷkoṭu paṉṟiyai māyttiṭa luṟṟaṉaṉ,
āyiṭai maṟṟav varuntavap paṉṟi
iṉaiyatu kūṟum.“ēṭā!niṟka!
niṟka!niṟka!muṉṉaryām niṉaintavāṟu
attuṇait tuṉpuṭait taṉṟiv vāḻkkai 50
kāṟṟum puṉalum kaṭippuṟ kiḻaṅkum
iṉaiyapal liṉpam itaṉ kaṇē yuḷavām;
āṟēḻ tiṅkaḷ akaṉṟapiṉ varutiyēl
piṉṉeṉaik kōṟalām”pīḻaiyō ṭivvurai
ceviyuṟīī muṭicāyt tiḷaiyavaṉ ceṉṟaṉaṉ.
tiṅkaḷpala pōṉapiṉ muṉimakaṉ ceṉṟa
tātaip paṉṟiyōr taṭattiṭaip peṭaiyoṭum
pōttiṉam palavoṭum aṉpiṉiṟ porutti
āṭalkaṇ ṭayirttaṉaṉ. āṟṟoṇā tarukuceṉṟu
“entāy!entāy!yātarō maṟṟitu! 60
vētanū laṟinta mētaku muṉivarar
pōṟṟiṭa vāḻntaniṉ pukaḻkkitu cālumō?”
eṉappala kūṟi iraṅkiṉaṉ;piṉṉar
vāḷkoṭu paṉṟiyai pāytatiṭal viḻaintāṉ.
āyiṭai muṉivaṉ akampataik turaikkum
“cellaṭā! celka tīkkuṇat tiḻiña!
eṉakkiv vāḻkkai iṉpuṭait tēyām;
niṉakkitil tuṉpam nikaḻumēl ceṉṟav
vāḷiṉiṉ neñcai vakuttu nī maṭika
eṉṟitu kūṟi iruntavap paṉṟitaṉ 70
iṉattoṭum ōṭi iṉṉuyir kāttatu.
iṉṉatu kaṇṭa iḷaiyavaṉ karutum.
“āvā!māṉiṭar arumaiyiṉ vīḻntu
puṉṉilai yeytiya pōḻtatil neṭuṅkāl
teru maru kiṉṟilar cilapakal kaḻintapiṉ
putiyatā nīcap poymaikoḷ vāḻvil
viruppuṭai yavarāy vēṟutā meṉṟum
aṟintilarēpōṉ ṟatiṟkaḷik kiṉṟār.
eṉcolkēṉ māyaiyiṉ eṇṇarum vañcam”.
timiṅkila vuṭalum ciṟiyapuṉ matiyum 80
ōrēḻ peṇṭirum uṭaiyatōr vēntaṉ
taṉpaṇik kicainteṉ tarukkelām aḻintu
vāḻntaṉaṉ kataiyiṉ muṉipōl vāḻkkai!
...............
.............
------------
47. Welcome Muse, the Beloved (16-1-1909, 23.1.1909) (Thiru
T.N.Ramachandran )
Welcome my bejewelled beloved, hailed as Muse!
Many days and months and years have rolled by
Since I straight beheld your gracious visage.
During those days when you held me your slave,
In solitude, far from the madding crowd,
We revelled in the sea of endless joy.
During those days of our idyllic union,
Among wafted voices like Kuyil's from groves,
There was none so sweet-throated as your own;
Nor could the flowers, so many, ever boast 10
Of a lustre matching your eyes'; waters
Of the cool springs gushed not with the coolness.
Of your words -- gems of purest ray serene.
Alone with you, deeming you as my life
And my deity, I served you many days.
As a thorn sticking in the throat pains him
That quaffs a cup of nectarean drink.
When I was oblivious of myself
Immersed in the bliss, of your company,
Came indigence to me, aye, the vilest
Of the vile on earth to besiege me sore. 20
When for a while he absented himself
And had the thorn removed and returned,
The golden jar of nectar had gone, alas!
To rid my penury when I undertook
One of the jobs in which the futile are
Engaged, by enlisting myself under
The service of the lord of a village
Situate in the South and him did serve,
One with a whale's body and a whelp's brain 30
You the treacherous one, abandoned me.
I wallowed in misery, totally robbed
Of all your gracious joy ineffable.
Somedays passed on; ha, what am I to day!
The very memory of my life with you Wore away.
Thus is a fable related:
A saint cursed to become a pig, addressed
His son thus: "Son, when I into a base pig Turn
suffer me not to live wretched;
To cut that body abominable 40
With a sword, shall indeed be your duty;
No sin you commit, as you obey me."
To this, the son did consent reluctant.
When the saint turned into a pig, the son,
The words of the Muni remembering,
Much grieved at the present form of the great
And glorious saint, rushed to knife the pig.
Then spake the sanctimonious pig thus:
"Sirrah, cease, desist, stop. This life indeed
Is not at all as painful as I once thought; 50
Wind and water and esculent tubers
And such other countless joys here abound;
Go; after six or seven months come back;
You may then kill me." With disgust he heard
These words and moved away by shame besieged.
Many months rolled by; the son of the Muni
Was aghast to behold his porcine father
Gladly frolic with his sow and piglets,
A good many. Unable to bear this He spoke thus:
"Father, oh father, whay may 60
This be? Can this ever square with the life
You lived, hailed by saints in Vedas well-versed?
Words as these he spoke and stood. sorrowing.
He desired to kill the pig with his sword.
Then the saintly pig atremble spake thus:
"Stop, go away, you wretched evil one!
This life unto me is sure very sweet!
If you feel aggrieved at this, take your sword
And plunge it in your bosom and perish!
This saying the saintly pig ran away 70
With his family go guard their dear lives.
At this the young man began to muse thus:
"Alas, when men from their state fall into
A plight wretched, they are for quite sometime
Unaware of it, all bewildered!
After a few days they begin to feel
A fascination for their novel life,
As false as base; they delight in this, as if
They had never known of any other life.
Thus thought-defying Maya cheats us all. 80
Like the fabled saint, that sexless one throve
With a whale-like body and a cur's mind,
Surrounded by wives seven in number.
I served him, forfeiting my sense of pride
And wallowed like the saint in the fable.
O Goddess of Poesy, forgetting
Your love I lived; thereafter this poor one
Roamed many a country for a few years;
With many I lived doing many things;
Many many I saw and sorrowed; 90
My days passed on; like the ship on a sea,
That had lost its captain, on Time's ocean
I suffered wave-tossed and was bewildered;
I came to know what pain and pleasure were.
Height and depth, light and darkness, good and bad,
Esteem of countrymen and blame, friendship
And enmity: These I learned to assess. you
Damsel-Poesy, all these days
Even in my dream, you would not grace me
With your beauteous face of lustrous smile.
Like a sword deprived of its keen splendour, 100
Like a face robbed of its joy, like the land
Of servitors shorn of all liberty,
Like sastras divorced from truth--mere garbage--,
Utter darkness pervaded my whole life.
Time passed, my thought grew averse to this life.
I longed for the life of renunciation;
Those are the true renouncers who receive
Pain and pleasure with equal thanks,
When taste-buds blunt,
one hates toothsome morsels; 110
Will any call that one a renouncer?
When dead to the joy of life, one hates life;
Is that renunciation? Why spin words?
Six or seven months passed; it dawned on me
That between my poor self and the great state
Of renunciation, the gap was vast.
What was there for me to do in this world?
I could not come by the state that is next
To renunciation and much sought by
The resolute of mind; I would not set 120
My mind on sensuous meanness praised by
Countless men; I would not deem it proper
To do away with the blame-worthy body
By giving up life through suicide.
'Of the various joys known to mankind,
If something untinged by animalism
Could be gained, it would be worthwhile to work
For it with unabated zeal and zest.'
Thus I thought and at that very moment,
Oh gracious Damsel of sweet Poesy! 130
I thought of your love. If a man that lay
Accursed, a stone for centuries on end,
Should regain his human form and become
Aware of his wondrous transformation,
How happy would he be? I, the poor one
Felt even so. Again I felt like him
Who, a hero, eager for battle, was
Released after shameful imprisonment,
And was blessed to fight for a righteous cause.
O bejewelled Kuyil! Your smiling lips, 140
Your deep eyes, your clear forehead, the sweetness
Of your words, the thrill of your touch:
All these Again took shape in my thought and again,
Oh great Glory! I sought refuge in you!
Pray, protect me; if I should lack your grace,
I--a sinner with nothing else on earth
To support me--, will die in misery;
Think on this and deign to be merciful.
The majestic poet who in Sanskrit
Composed Sakuntala of global fame 150
And the great authors of Tamil Cilampu
And the epic of divine Rama's life
Were all endowed with hearts filled with your grace.
Should you think that I cannot rank with them
I do not aspire for that eminence;
Sovereignty of your heart ill-becomes me:
I do not seek it: oh soft one, bless me
With a word of yours very like a fruit;
I will abide by it and that will do.
If you with your cool and flower-soft fingers 160
Soothe my head, I will dwell in happy pride.
Of the loved union -- full and free--, you had
With me in the past, I will not dare think.
Gone are my youthfulness and clarity;
While young all men are gods; as days roll by
They decay. O lady whose eyes are like swords
I, the poor one, am again bent upon
Serving your good self with a melting heart.
Muse ---loved and jewelled--, I bid you welcome!
It is your duty to bless me with grace! 170
-Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original was serialised in India. However, so far only a
portion of this poem has been published. Even here the words of the bard
have been tampered with. For the first time the entire poem as published
by Bharati is brought to the notice of the public by the Tamil
University.
------------------
48. kuru kōvintar
{[kuṟippu]: ‘kuru kōvintacimha vijayam’ -- eṉpatu 1941ām varuṭap patippiṉ talaippu
ākum.}
āyirat teḻunūṟ ṟaimpat tāṟu
vikrama ṉāṇṭu, vīraruk kamutām
āṉanta puratti lārntiṉi tiruntaṉaṉ
pāñcā lattup paṭartaru ciṅkak
kulattiṉai vakutta kurumaṇi yāvāṉ 5
ñāṉap peruṅkaṭal, nallicaik kaviñaṉ
vāṉamvīḻn tutiriṉum vāḷkoṭu taṭukkum
vīrar nāyakaṉ, mētiṉi kātta
kurukō vinta ciṅkamāṅ kōmakaṉ
avaṉtiruk kaṭṭaḷai aṟintupal ticaiyiṉum 10
pāñcā lattuṟu paṭaivalōr nāṭoṟum
nāṭoṟum vantu naṇṇukiṉ ṟārāl.
āṉanta purattil āyira māyiram
vīrarkaḷ kuruviṉ viruppiṉait terivāṉ
kūṭivan teytiṉar koḻumpoḻi liṉaṅkaḷum 15
puṉṉakai puṉainta putumalart tokutiyum
painniṟam virinta paḻaṉak kāṭciyum
“nalvara vākuka nammaṉōr varavu” eṉṟu
ācikaḷ kūṟi ārppaṉa pōṉṟa
puṇṇiya nāḷiṟ pukaḻvaḷar kuravaṉ 20
tirumoḻi kēṭkac ceṟintaṉar cīṭarkaḷ.
“yātavaṉ kūṟum? eṉṉemak karuḷum?
eppaṇi vitittema tēḻēḻ piṟaviyum
iṉpuṭait tākkum?” eṉappala karuti,
mālōṉ tirumuṉar vantukaṇ ṇuyarttē
25
ākkiṉai terivāṉ āvaloṭu tuṭikkum
tēvarai yottaṉar tiṭukkeṉap pīṭattu
ēṟiniṉ ṟatukāṇ! iḷamaiyum tiṟalum
ātipat takaimaiyum amaintatō uruvam
viḻikaḷil teyvap peruṅkaṉal vīciṭat 30
tirumuṭi cūḻntōr tēcukāt tiruppa
tūkkiya karattil cuṭarumiḻn tiruntatu
kūṟanā naṭuṅkumōr koṟṟak kūrvāḷ
eṇṇilā vīrar ivvuru nōkki
vāṉiṉ ṟiṟaṅkiya māntirikaṉ muṉarc 35
ciṅkak kūṭṭam tikaittirun tāṅk
mōṉamuṟ ṟaṭaṅki muṭivaṇaṅ kiṉarāl
vāḷnuṉi kāṭṭi māṭciyār kuravaṉ
tiruvuḷa nōkkañ ceppuvaṉ. teyvac
cēyita ḻacaivuṟac ciṉantōr erimalaik 40
kumuṟutal pōlveḷik koṇṭaṉa tirumoḻi:
“vāḷitai maṉitar mārpiṭaik kuḷippa
virumpukiṉ ṟēṉyāṉ tīrkilā viṭāykoḷ
tarumat teyvan tāṉpala kurutip
paliviḻai kiṉṟatāl paktarkāḷ! nummiṭai 45
neñciṉaik kiḻittu nilamicai yutiram
vīḻttit tēviyiṉ viṭāyiṉait tavirppa
yārvaru kiṉṟīr!” eṉṉalum cīṭarkaḷ
naṭuṅkiyōr kaṇamvarai nāveḻā tiruntaṉar.
kammeṉa ōrciṟu kaṇaṅkaḻi vuṟṟatu 50
āṅkirun tārpal lāyira ruḷḷoru
vīraṉmuṉ vantu viḷampuvaṉ iḵtē:
“kurumaṇi, niṉṉoru koṟṟavāḷ kiḻippa
viṭāyaṟāt tarumam mēmpaṭu teyvatattu
iraiyeṉa māyvaṉ ēṟṟaruḷ purikavē.” 55
puṉṉakai malarntatu puṉitanal vataṉam
kōyiluḷ avaṉaik kuravarkōṉ koṭucela
maṟṟataṉ niṉṟōr maṭuviṉvan tāleṉak
kuruti nīrpāyak kuḻāttiṉar kaṇṭaṉar.
pārmiṉ! caṟkuru paḷīreṉak kōyiliṉ 60
veḷippōn tāṅku mēviṉōr muṉṉam
mutaṟpali muṭittu mukamalarn tōṉāy
miṉṉeṉap pāyntu mīṇṭu vantuṟṟaṉaṉ.
mīṇṭumav vutiravāḷ viṇvaḻi tūkkip
piṉvaru moḻikaḷ pēcuvaṉ kuravarkōṉ: 65
“māṉuṭar neñciliv vāḷiṉaip patikkac
cittamnāṉ koṇṭēṉ tēvitāṉ piṉṉumōr
palikēṭ kiṉṟāḷ paktarkāḷ! nummuḷē
iṉṉum iṅ koruvaṉ irattamē tantuik
kāḷiyait tākaṅ kaḻittiṭattuṇivōṉ 70
evaṉuḷaṉ?” eṉalum iṉṉumōr tuṇivuṭai
vīraṉmuṉ niṉṟu viruppiṉai uṇarttiṉaṉ.
ivaṉaiyuṅ kōyiluḷ iṉitaḻait tēki
iraṇṭām palimuṭit tīṇṭiṉaṉ kuravaṉ
kurutiyaik kaṇṭu kuḻāttiṉar naṭuṅkiṉar. 75
iṅṅaṉa mīṇṭumē iyaṟṟip
paliyō raintu paramaṉaṅ kaḷittaṉaṉ.
aṟattiṉait tamatōr aṟiviṉāṟ koṇṭa
maṭṭilē māṉiṭar māṇpeṟa lākār
aṟamatu taḻaippa neñcakam kāṭṭi 80
vāṭkuttu ēṟṟu māypavar periyōr,
avarē meymmaiyōr muttarum avarē
tōṉṟu nūṟāyiram toṇṭar tammuḷḷē
attakai nallarai aṟikutal vēṇṭiyē
taṇṇaruṭ kaṭalān takavuyar kuravaṉ 85
koṭumaicēr cōtaṉai purintiṭal kuṟittaṉaṉ
aṉpiṉ mikaiyāl āruyir nalkuvōr
aivaraik kaṇṭapiṉ avviyal uṭaiyār
eṇṇilar uḷareṉat tuṇintuiṉpu eytiṉaṉ
veyyaceṅ kurutiyiṉ vīḻntutā miṟantu 90
corkkamuṟ ṟāreṉat toṇṭarkoṇ ṭirukkum
aintunaṉ maṇiyeṉum aintumut taraiyum
kōyilu ḷiruntupē ravaimuṉark koṇarntāṉ!
ārttaṉar toṇṭar! aruviyap peytiṉar!
viḻikaḷait tuṭaittu mīḷavum nōkkiṉar! 95
jayajaya kurumaṇi jayakuru ciṅkam
eṉappala vāḻikaḷ icaittaṉar, āṭiṉar
appōḻ tiṉṉaruḷ avatarit taṉaiyāṉ,
naṟcuṭarp pariti nakaipurin tāṅku
kuṟunakai purintu kuṟaiyaṟu muttar 100
aivarkaḷ tammaiyum akamuṟat taḻuvi
yācikaḷ kūṟi avaiyiṉai nōkkik
kaṭalmuḻak keṉṉa muḻaṅkuvaṉ: -- “kāṇīr!
kāḷiyum namatu kaṉakanaṉ ṉāṭṭut
tēviyum oṉṟeṉat tērntanal aṉparkāḷ, 105
naṭukkamnīreyta nāṉ aim muṟaiyum
paliyiṭac ceṉṟatu, pāvaṉai maṉṟa
eṉkarat tāṟkolō nummuyir eṭuppaṉ
aimmuṟai tāṉum aṉparai maṟaittunum
neñcakac cōtaṉai nikaḻttiṉaṉ yāṉē. 110
tāymaṇi nāṭṭiṉ uṇmait taṉayarnīr
eṉpatu teḷintēṉ. eṉkara vāḷāl
aṟuttatiṅ kiṉṟain tāṭukaḷ kāṇpīr!
cōtaṉai vaḻiyiṉun tuṇiviṉaik kaṇṭēṉ
kaḷittateṉ neñcam kaḻintaṉa kavalaikaḷ.” 115
kurukō vintaṉ koṇṭatōr tarumam
‘cīṭartam mārkkam’ eṉappukaḻ ciṟantatu
iṉṟumam mārkkat tiruppavar tampeyar
‘kālacā’ eṉpa ‘kālacā’ eṉumoḻi
muttartam caṅka muṟaiyeṉum poruḷatu 120
muttartam capaikku mūlarka ḷākamaṟṟu
aivaraṉ ṉōrtamai aruḷiṉaṉ āriyaṉ.
camaintatu ‘kālacā’ eṉumpeyarc caṅkam
pārata meṉṟa paḻamperu nāṭṭiṉar
āvitēyn taḻintilar, āṇmaiyiṟ kuṟaintilar 125
vīramuñ cirattaiyum vīntila reṉṟu
puviyiṉōr aṟiyap purintaṉaṉ muṉivaṉ.
annāḷ mukuntaṉ avatarit tāṅku ōr
teyvikat talaivaṉ cīruṟat tōṉṟi
maṇmā cakaṉṟa vāṉpaṭu coṟkaḷāl 130
eḻuppiṭuṅ kālai, iṟantutāṉ kiṭakkilaḷ,
iḷamaiyum tuṇivum icaintunam aṉṉai
cātiyiṉ māṉan tāṅkamuṟ paṭuvaḷeṉṟu
ulakiṉō raṟiviṭai yuṟuttiṉaṉ muṉivaṉ
aimperum pūtat takilamē camaitta 135
muṉṉava ṉoppa muṉivaṉum aintu
cīṭarkaḷ mūlamāt tēcuṟu pāratac
cātiyai vakuttaṉaṉ taḻaittatu tarumam
koṭuṅkōl paṟṟiya puṉkaik kuricilar
naṭuṅkuva rāyiṉar. nakaittaṉaḷ cutantirai. 140
āyirat teḻunūṟ ṟaimpat tāṟu
vikkira mārkka ṉāṇṭiṉil, viyaṉpukaḻk
kurukō vintaṉ koṟṟamār cīṭaraik
kūṭṭiyē teyvak koluvoṉ ṟamaittaṉaṉ
kāṇṭaṟ kariya kāṭci! kaviṉtikaḻ 145
ariyā taṉattil amarntaṉaṉ muṉivarkō.
cūḻntiruntaṉar uyirt toṇṭartā aivarum
taṉtiruk karattāl āṭaikaḷ cārtti
mālaikaḷ cūṭṭi matippuṟa iruttik
kaṇmaṇi pōṉṟār aivarmēṟ kaṉintu 150
kuḻaivuṟa vāḻttik kuḻāttiṉai nōkki
“kāṇṭirō! mutalāṅ `kālacā,” eṉṟaṉaṉ
nāṭun tarumamum naṉkitiṟ kāppāṉ
amaintatic caṅkam aṟimiṉ nīr eṉṟāṉ.
arukiṉil ōṭiya āṟṟiṉ niṉ ṟaiyaṉ 155
iruppuc ciṟukalat tiṉṉīr koṇarntu
vāḷmuṉai koṇṭu maṟṟataik kalakki
mantira mōtiṉaṉ maṉattiṉai aṭakkic
cittamē muḻutuñ civattiṭai yākkic
capamurait tiṭṭāṉ, cayapporun tiruak 160
kolumuṉar vantu kutittuniṉ ṟiṭṭāḷ.
āṟṟunīr taṉaiyō aṭittatat tiruvāḷ
ayarntu pōyniṉṟa arumpukaḻ pāratac
cātiyiṉ tiṟalkaḷ tammaiyē iyakki
nalluyir nalkiṉaṉ. nāṭelām iyaṅkiṉa. 165
tavamuṭai aivarait taṉmuṉar niṟutti
mantira nīrai mācaṟat teḷittu
aruḷmaya māki avarviḻi tīṇṭiṉaṉ
pārmiṉō ulakīr! paramaṉaṅ karattāl
avarviḻi tīṇṭiya akkaṇat taṉṟē 170
nāṭaṉait tiṟkum nalvaḻi tiṟantatu!
cīṭarka ḷaṉaivarum tīṭcaiiḵ taṭaintaṉar.
aiyaṉ colvaṉ, “aṉparkāḷ! nīvir
ceytiṭap peṟṟa tīṭcaiyiṉ nāmam
amirtam eṉṟu aṟimiṉ! arumpēṟām itu 175
peṟṟār yāvarum pēraruḷ peṟṟār.
numakkiṉit tarumam nuvaṉṟiṭak kēṇmiṉ.
oṉṟām kaṭavuḷ. ulakiṭait tōṉṟiya
māṉiṭa rellāñ cōtarar māṉuṭar
camattuva muṭaiyār, cutantirañ cārntavar. 180
cīṭarkāḷ! kulattiṉum ceyaliṉum aṉaittiṉum
ikkaṇan toṭṭunīr yāviru oṉṟē.
pirivukaḷ tuṭaippīr! piritalē cātal.
āriyar cātiyuḷ āyirañ cāti
vakuppavar vakuttu māyka, nīr aṉaivirum 185
tarumam, kaṭavuḷ, cattiyam, cutantiram
eṉpavai pōṟṟa eḻuntiṭum vīrac
cātiyoṉ ṟaṉaiyē cārntō rāvir.
anītiyum, koṭumaiyum aḻittiṭuñ cāti;
maḻittiṭa laṟiyā vaṉmukac cāti; 190
irumpu muttiraiyum iṟukiya kaccaiyum
kaiyiṉil vāḷum kaḻaṉṟiṭāc cāti;
cōtara naṭput toṭarntiṭu cāti;
aracaṉ illātu teyvamē yaracā
māṉuṭar tuṇaivarā, maṟamē pakaiyāk 195
kuṭiyara ciyaṟṟuṅ koḷkaiyār cāti;
aṟattiṉai veṟukkilīr maṟattiṉaip
poṟukkilīr tāyttiru nāṭṭaic cantatam pōṟṟip
pukaḻoṭu vāḻmiṉ! pukaḻoṭu vāḻmiṉ!”
eṉṟurait taiyaṉ iṉpuṟa vāḻttiṉaṉ 200
avaṉaṭi pōṟṟi ārttaṉar cīṭarkaḷ
kurukō vintak kōmakaṉ nāṭṭiya
koṭiuyarn tacaiyak kuvalayam pukaḻntatu
āṭiyē māyntatu araṅkacīp āṭci. 205
-----------------
48. Guru Gobind Singh (30-1-1909, 6-2-1909, 13-2-1909, 20-2-1909.)
(Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
Vikrama of Seventeen fiftysix,
'Annus mirabilis!! ..... Guru Gobind,
The elixir great of mighty victors
Flourished at Anandpur in joyance great.
Ha, he was the jewel of a Guru
Who fashioned the race of lions of Panchal,
An ocean of wisdom and a poet Of melodic harmony.
He, the Lord. Of heroes, could stay with his sword
The crumbling heavens. The solemn mandate 10
Of this soterial Lord of the wide world -- The Prince
Guru Gobind Singh-, drew to him
Aye, day by day, from all the directions
The valiant warriors of brave Panchal.
Afire with a desire to know the hest
f "Heroes' Guru", thronged they in thousands
At Anandpur; thither did they gather
On that hallowed day, to drink in the words
Of the divine Guru ever-glorious.
The fecund groves and gardens, fresh flowers 20
Of iris-hues and green fields extensive Blessed and
smiled and thus joyous greeted them;
"We bid our people a hearty welcome".
"What may he say? How may he grant us grace?
What may he bid us do to sanctify our lives --
Seven of the past, and seven, future-?"
Thus they did muse and like anxious Devas
Stood before him who was Vishnu Himself
And looked up to him to know of their task.
On a sudden ascended and there stood 30
On the pedestal, a form wrought of youth
Valour, and aye, regal authority.
From the eyes flashed forth divine flame immense,
A shield of halo encircled the crown,
A sword, keen and kingly, emitting fire,
- No tongue on earth can describe this terror --
Was held aloft by the uplifted hand.
Him the heaven-descended holy magus,
The pride of lions in a spell of trance
Eyed in sheer silence bowing low their heads.
To the sword-tip, the majestic Guru 40
Pointed and made bare the holy intent
Of his hallowed heart; divine words gushed forth
Like the rumbling of an angry volcano
As his divine red lips parted to speak:
"I wish to plunge this sword into the hearts
Of men and there bathe it; O ye chelas!
Full many a bloody sacrifice seeks
The Deity of Dharma, aye, all a-thirst.
Is there amongst you any that is willing 50
To have his heart ripped open, that the thirst
Of Devi may be quenched by ruddy drops
That fall drenching earth? Him the chelas heard
And stood for a moment in mute terror.
A small second in stillness sped away.
From out of the assembled myriads
Came forth a hero and humbly spake thus:
"Gem of Guru! Rent by your kingly sword,
As food for God of excelling Dharma
That as yet is unslaked, I offer to die. 60
May you this votive offering approve".
The sacred visage was wreathed in smiles.
Into the temple the kingly Guru
Went with him; very soon, the gathered crowd
Witnessed blood streaming forth as from a tank.
Lo, the Sad-Guru comes from the temple
Like a flash, and lightning-like he shoots
Before the assembly; with the triumph
Of the first sacrifice, his visage beams.
The Guru--King lifts aloft once again
The blood-soaked sword and articulates thus: 70
"I did desire to deep implunge this sword
Into the hearts of men; o ye chelas!
Devi demands yet another sacrifice.
Is there any another, aye, amidst you
Who can dare appease Kali with his blood?"
Hearing this a second hero walked forth
As a willing victim; him the Guru
Led into the temple; there performing
Sacrifice again, the Guru returned.
The crowd beheld the blood and quaked in fear. 80
Again, yet again, and aye, once again.
Five were by the supreme one sacrificed.
Men who are merely in dharma well-versed
Are not to be reckoned as truly great.
They indeed are the great ones who expose
Their bosoms to the sword-thrust and perish
That Dharma may thrive well; these are the true;
These are the ones truly liberated.
Amid the hundred thousands of devotees, 90
To identify these few, the Guru--
An ever-glorious sea of mercy--,
Devised this test of utter cruelty.
As he came by Five who in boundless love
Could offer their dear lives, the happy truth
Dawned on him: "Countless are they like the Five."
The devotees thought the Five goodly gems,
The five that shed their blood, preciously red,
Had truly gained valhalla, the Veer-Swarg.
As them the Guru from the teinple fetched,
Loud did roar the devotees in sheer joy; 100
Great was their wonder; wiping their eyes twain
They looked deep at them, again and again,
"Hail, hail Gem of Guru, hail Guru-Lion!"
Thus they hailed him in hymn and solemn strain
And danced in joy. He, the incarnation
Of Grace, smiled; it was like the lustrous smile
Of the goodly sun. He embraced the Five,
The blemishless Muktas, and on them poured
Benedictions; then to the assembly
He spake in words resounding as the sea: 110
"Behold, Kali and our auric Devi
Of Bharat are but one as you well know.
My loved ones, five times did I, aye, fare forth
To sacrifice, striking terror in you.
It was but a make-believe; would I ever
With my hands take the life of any one
Of you? I concealed all the while the Five
Thus putting your mettle to cruel test.
Now am I convinced that you indeed are 120
The true sons of Mother-Bharat.
My sword Did tear this day, you see, five goats only.
The test but attests your great courage true;
Rid of sorrows, my heart revels in joy."
The Dharma that the Guru did preach
Grew in glory as the Way of the Chelas.
To this day the adherent of the Way
Is called Khalsa. Khalsa means the Great Way
Of Guru-mukh Sangat, the Society 130
Of the Liberated while yet alive.
The Arya graciously decreed the Five
To be the founders of Muktas Sabha";
Thus was constituted Khalsa the Sang.
"With wilted spirit they have not perished yet;
The renowned people of hoary Bharat;
Loss of manliness, they have not yet suffered;
Valour and devotion are still their lot."
The Saint declared these to the world.
A leader unique, divine, glorious,
Like Krishna of yore, he did birth assume. 140
Behold! As he with pure heaven-bred words
Uncontaminated by dirt of earth,
Chose to bestir, She wasn't dead, the Mother --
The resolute One of eternal youth --
Sure would she rise to defend the honour
Of Her clan. This the world from the Saint, learnt.
As the First One fashioned the universe
With elements five, so too the great Saint
With five disciples wrought the lustrous race
Of Bharat; Dharma throve, aye, thus revived. 150
The nominal men who tyrannously
Wielded a sinful sceptre shook with fear.
Goddess Liberty -- Magna Mater --, smiled.
In Vikrama -- seventeen fifty six --,
Guru Gobind Singh of wondrous glory
Summoned his princely disciples, and held
A durbar -- a rare sight of great marvel --.
The King of Saints was seated on the throne
Of wondrous beauty; the five disciples
Dear as life, him encircling stood; them he 160
Robed and garlanded with his divine hands;
He assigned unto them seats of honour
And blessed them, dear as precious orbs of eyes,
In melting love, and then, the gathering
He addressed: "Behold this, the first Khalsa!
O ye! Know this to be the Sang, to guard
Well the nation and its Dharma." Thus he.
From the river that flowed nearby, the Lord
Fetched water sweet, in a small iron-pail.
He stirred it with the tip of his sword
The while chanting mantras; he stilled his mind; 170
With heart oned with Shiva, he did 'japa',
Into that solemn durbar, there came
Great Goddess Victory in joyous leaps.
Did he merely stir with sword the water
Of river? He did in truth, stir to life
The waning skills of the race of Bharat,
Infusing into it fresh vital life;
The whole nation became quick and vibrant.
He made the Five of tapas, stand before him 180
And on them the holy water sprinkled
To rid them of all blemish; the Guru--
Grace-incarnate--, touched their eyes.
Behold this, O ye of the world! That very moment
The godly one touched their eyes, the goodly way
For the whole nation, was flung open.
Initiated were the chelas all,
Spake the Lord thus: "My loved ones, this Diksha
To you administered, is called Amrit;
It is indeed a rare beatitude;
Great grace is the lot of all Dikshitas. 190
Now hearken to your Dharma: One only
Is God; all men in the world are brothers;
All are equal and are with freedom blessed.
O ye disciples! From now on, ye all
Are but one in family, deed and all.
Wipe out divisiveness; division
Indeed is death; may they all, all, perish,
The fell devisers of divisive castes
Amongst Aryas. You are all of that one caste 200
Wrought of heroism, ushered in to hail
Dharma and Godhead, Truth and Liberty.
It is your caste that shall quell injustice
And shall annihilate all cruelty,
Yours is the brave-faced caste, whose hair shall never
Be cut; never shall your caste throw away
Iron-bangle, breeches and girded sword...
Your caste shall ever foster brotherly friendship.
No king but God shall rule you; men indeed
Are your friends; you are the foe of tyranny; 210
Thus shall thrive the Republic of your caste.
For ever hail you Motherland divine
And live in glory, aye, in all glory."
Thus he spoke and them blessed in great delight.
His feet his chelas hailed aned roared in joy.
As the flag hoisted aloft by the King
Guru Gobind wafted, the world extolled;
Wholly perished the reign of Aurangzeb.
-Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original was serialised in India.
----------------
49. veyya iṭi
iṭiyēṟu cārpiluṟa uṭal ventōṉ
      oṉṟuraiyā tiruppa āli
muṭiyēṟi mōtiyateṉ ṟaruḷ mukilaik
      kaṭuñcoṟkaḷ moḻivāṉ pōlak
kaṭiyēṟu malarppantu mōtiyateṉ ṟiṉiyāḷaik
      kāykiṉṟāṉāl
vaṭiyēṟu vēleṉavev viḻiyēṟi
      yeṉṉāvi varuntal kāṇāṉ.
----------------
49. The Dread Thunderbolt (27-2-1909)
While one who is burnt by its close passage
Of a thunderbolt says nothing, another
Whose head is struck by a few hailstones
Castigates the merciful clouds with harsh words;
Even so, that one berates his loved one
For throwing at him a ball of flower petals
Totally ignoring my deep suffering, when
I am wounded by the spears of her lovely eyes.
- Prof. R.E.Asher
Note: Bharati's 'Inana Ratam' was serialised in India. This poem is
recited by Chittaranjan, the younger brother of the heroine of 'Inana
Ratam.' Bharati has also given the meaning of this poem in simple prose.
---------------
50. jātīya kītam
naḷirmaṇi nīrum, nayampaṭu kaṉikaḷum
kuḷirpūn teṉṟalum koḻumpoḻiṟ pacumaiyum
vāyntunaṉ kilakuvai vāḻiya aṉṉai! (vantē)
teṇṇila vataṉiṟ cilirttiṭum iravum
taṇṇiyal virimalar tāṅkiya tarukkaḷam
puṉṉakai oḷiyum tēmoḻip polivum
vāyntaṉai, iṉpamum varaṅkaḷum nalkuvai, (vantē)
kōṭi kōṭi kuralkaḷ olikkavum
kōṭi kōṭi puyattuṇai koṟṟamār
nīṭu palpaṭai tāṅkimuṉ niṟkavum
kūṭu tiṇmai kuṟaintaṉai’eṉpateṉ?
āṟṟaliṉ mikuntaṉai,arumpataṅ kūṭṭuvai
māṟṟalar koṇarnta vaṉpaṭai yōṭṭuvai (vantē)
aṟivunī,tarumamnī, uḷḷamnī, ataṉiṭai
marumamnī,uṭaṟkaṇ vāḻntiṭum uyirnī;
tōḷiṭai vaṉpunī neñcakattu aṉpunī
ālayan tōṟum aṇipeṟa viḷaṅkum
teyvac cilaiyelām,tēvi,iṅkuṉatē. (vantē)
pattup paṭaikoḷum pārvati tēviyum
kamalat tikaḻkaḷiṟ kaḷittiṭum kamalaiyum
aṟiviṉai yaruḷum vāṇiyum aṉṉai nī! (vantē)
tiruni ṟaintaṉai, taṉṉika roṉṟilai!
      tītu tīrntaṉai, nīrvaḷañ cārntaṉai;
maruvu ceykaḷiṉ naṟpayaṉ malkuvai,
      vaḷaṉiṉ vantatōr painniṟam vāyntaṉai
peruku miṉpa muṭaiyai kuṟunakai
      peṟṟo ḷirntaṉai, palpaṇi pūṇṭaṉai;
iruni lattuvan temmuyir tāṅkuvai,
      eṅkaḷ tāyniṉ pataṅkaḷ iṟaiñcuvām! (vantē)
---------------
50. The Song of the Nation (19-3-1909). (Thiru T.N.Ramachandran )
1. Mother! Thou art rich with splendid waters,
Ambrosial fruitage, cool fragrant winds,
Gardens galore of jasper greenery. Vande Mataram...
2. Moon-thrilled nights, fragrant trees with cool blossoms,
Lustre of smile and mellifluous words are thine.
Thou art a grantor of and boons. Vande Mataram ...
3. Billions and billions of thy voices resound;
Thy countless phalanxes stand in order;
Is it not lack of sense, should they call thee weak?
In excelling might thou wilt surely secure
Beatitudes and drive away hostile forces. Vande Mataram ...
4. Thou art Buddhi: Thou art Dharma!
Thou art The Bosom and the Arcanum therein!
Thou art life animating Body!
Thou art the Strength of Shoulder, Love of Heart:
Divine and beautiful icons that grace
Every temple are indeed thine own forms. Vande Mataram ...
5. Goddess Parvati who wields ten weapons,
Lakshmi gladly throned on lotus, Vani
By whom is Buddhi blest, are but Thee, Mother! Vande Mataram ...
6. Thou art sheer divinity, peerless One!
Thou art blemishless; Thou art blessed with
The wealth of waters; Thou wilt grant us
The rich yield of fields; green in hue Thou art
Fresh and fecund; Thou art joy; Thy face is
Lit by a lovely smile; richly bejewelled
Thou dost our life ever sustain on earth.
Our great Mother we hail Thy golden feet.
- Thiru T.N.Ramachandran
Note: The Tamil original appeared in India. It was re-published in
Karma-Yogi
in February, 1910. This is a second rendering of Bankim Chandra
Chatterji's poem, "Vande Mataram" by Bharati who says that this
translation is better suited for musically rendering the song. It should
be mentioned here that Sri Aurobindo also translated Bankim Chandra's
poem twice.
-----------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file was last updated on 6 December 2022
Feel free to send the corrections to the webmaster (pmadurai AT
gmail.com)
