                                 [pmdr0.gif]
                     ___________________________________

                   Kalingathupparani -English Translation
                              by Kausalya Hart

           cayaṅkoṇṭār iyaṟṟiya kaliṅkattup paraṇi
                āṅkila moḻipeyarppu - kaucalyā hārṭ
                           In unicode/utf-8 format
                     ___________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   Acknowledgements:
       Our Sincere thanks go to Dr. Kausalya Hart (Univ of California,
       Berkeley, California, USA) for providing
       a soft copy of the English Translation and for permission to
       include this work as part of Project Madurai collections.
       Preparation of HTML and PDF versions: Dr. K. Kalyanasundaram,
       Lausanne, Switzerland.
       © Project Madurai, 1998-2020.
       Project Madurai is an open, voluntary, worldwide initiative devoted
       to preparation
       of electronic texts of tamil literary works and to distribute them
       free on the Internet.
       Details of Project Madurai are available at the website
       [1]https://www.projectmadurai.org/
       You are welcome to freely distribute this file, provided this
       header page is kept intact.
     __________________________________________________________________

        Kalingathupparani (The War of Kalingam) -English Translation
                            by Dr. Kausalya Hart

   Source:
       Kalingathupparani (The War of Kalingam)
       by Jayangondar
       English Translation by Dr. Kausalya Hart
       (retired Tamil Lecturer)
       South and Southeast Asian Studies
       University of California, Berkeley, California, USA.
       -------------

                                Introduction
                    KALINGATHUPPARANI by Oṭṭakkuthar

       In 12th century CE, Jayangoṇḍār wrote the Kalingathuparani
       describing the war between Karunāgarathondaimān, the Pallava chief
       and the king of Kalinga, Anandavanman, at the time of Kulothunga
       Chola I (1070-1120).
       The book is divided into fourteen chapters. After the kadavul
       vāzthu (invocation), Jayangondar describes the beauty of the girls
       waiting to welcome their husbands when they return from the war.
       This part has lovely akam poetry. Later chapters describe the
       goddess and the peys and their lives. Most of the important
       characters of this text are the peys, something that is special to
       this book.
       In the middle of the poem Jayangondar describes the life of
       Kulothungan. He was born to the Venki king Narendra and his queen,
       the daughter of Rajaraja Chola. Jayangondar describes the lineage
       of the Chola kings, Kulothungan’s birth, his family, his early life
       as a baby and as a young prince. As a prince and king he fought
       many wars and conquered many lands. He became king when Rajaraja
       died in battle and made the chaotic land flourish. When he wished
       to engage in a war with the Kalinga king, his commander-in-chief
       Karunagaran fought and conquered the Kalinga king Anandavarman.
       The final chapters describe the Kalinga war as seen by one of the
       peys who saw the battle in the Kalinga country, came back to the
       goddess and described what he saw to the goddess and other peys.
       The poems describe how the goddess showed the peys the battlefield
       and finally how they made a porridge on the battlefield and served
       it to their friends and others. At the end the peys praise the king
       and his valor.
       Content of Kalingattupparani by Jayangondar
       1. The song of praising gods and goddesses. The first chapter
       praises gods and worships them to protect Kulothunga Cholan I.
       2. The song of the warriors. In this chapter the warriors returning
       from the battlefield ask their women to open the doors for them.
       The poems describe the beauty of the women.
       3. The song of the Forest. The third chapter describes the forest
       where Anangu, the goddess and her servants the peys live.
       4. The song of the Temple. The fourth chapter describes how the
       Peys constructed a new temple for Anangu,
       5. The song of the Anangu. The fifth chapter describes the beauty
       of Ananagu, the goddess.
       6. The song of the suffering peys. In the sixth chapter, the poems
       describe how the peys, servants of Anangu, tell the goddess how
       hungry they are and ask for food.
       7. Songs of magic.The seventh chapter describes how a pey from the
       Himalayas learned some magic and returned. He shows the magic to
       the goddess.
       8. The song of the Chola dynasty. In the eighth chapter the
       Himalayan pey tells the goddess the history of the Chola dynasty
       from Vishnu to Karikālan and how the king Karikālan inscribed the
       history of the Cholas on the Himalayas as Nāradar had narrated it
       to him. The pey tells the history of the Chola kings from Karikālan
       until Kulothungan First.
       9. The song of the hungry peys and the Himalayan pey. The ninth
       chapter describes how hungry the peys are and how they complain to
       the goddess. The Himalayan pey tells them that there will be a war
       between the Cholas and the Kalinga king in the Kalinga country and
       the peys will get enormous amounts of food from the battlefield.
       The peys are very happy.
       10. The song of birth and growth of the Chola prince Kulothungan
       the First. In the tenth chapter, the goddess describes to the peys
       nthe birth of Kulothunga Cholan First, his early life as a baby and
       a prince, the wars that he fought as a prince and how he conquered
       many lands and how he became a king. At that time a Kuli pey that
       has seen the Kalinga war came and tells them about the battlefield.
       11. The song of Chola army going to the war. In the eleventh
       chapter, a Kuli pey tells the goddess how the Kalinga king did not
       pay tribute to the Chola king and how the Chola king ordered the
       army to go to the Kalinga country to fight under the chief
       Karunāgaran, the ruler of Vaṇḍaiyar land. This chapter tells about
       the king of Kalinga country.
       12. The song of the war.The twelfth chapter describes the war
       between the Chola warriors and Kalinga warriors.
       13. The song of the battlefield. The thirteenth chapter describes
       the battlefield. Anangu and her escort peys go to the battlefield
       and she shows them the warriors, elephants, horses, chariots and
       women and tells them about how they suffered in the war.
       14. The song of the porridge. The fourteenth chapter describes how
       the peys cook porridge, eat and serve to others. The peys speak.
       The peys praise Anangu and the king Kulothungan the first.
       This English translation of Kalingathup parani is divided into 7
       Parts to make it clearer for readers.

   Part. 1. Praising Gods (Poems 1-20)
       Part 2. Warriors and Women (Poems 21-74)
       Part 3. The description of Anangu’s Forest, temple and her body and
       ornaments. (Poems75 -133)
       Part 4. The description of the peys. Their emaciated bodies and
       poverty.
       The pey from the Himalayas, his magic, the history of the Chola
       dynasty.
       Part 5. Complaints of the peys. King Kulothungan’s birth and youth
       Part 6. The Kalinga war and a description of the battlefield.
       Part 7. The peys cook porridge

   ------------

                      Kalingathupparani by Jeyangondar.
                   PART 1. Praising the gods. (Poems 1-20)
               Chapter 1. Kadavul vāzhthu. Praising the gods.

   1, 2. To make this world flourish
   and give good lives to all,
   Shiva married the daughter of the Himalayas
   as Vishnu, dark as a cloud
   gave his sister Shakthi in marriage
   pouring water on their hands
   and Brahma the creator of the world
   performed the marriage ceremony.
   Let us praise him,
   so that our king Abhayan, Ubhaya Kulothungan,
   the heir of the Chola dynasty,
   may live long.
   He rules following the precepts of the Vedas
   and protects the earth goddess
   created by Brahma.
   -------
   3, 4. Let us praise the divine name of Vishnu
   the omnipresent god.
   He gives his grace to the world
   and revealed the universe in his mouth
   to his mother Yasoda when he was a child.
   Let us worship him so that our gracious king Abhayan,
   seated under his matchless royal umbrella,
   may prosper, protecting the wide world.
   ----------
   5, 6. Let us praise four-faced Brahma,
   the origin of the world and creator of the four tracts of land—
   hills, fields, ocean and forests—
   the four aims of life—
   dharma, wealth, pleasure and moksha—
   and the four Vedas
   so that our king Kuladeeban
   may live long,
   brightening his dynasty
   and protecting the four lands, the four directions,
   the wide four oceans, and the four castes.
   -------
   7, 8. Let us worship the sun god
   who brightens the whole world surrounded by wide oceans,
   takes away deep darkness
   and rules the whole earth with his unique wheel.
   May he give his grace to our victorious king Jayadungan
   so that he may live long and rule the world
   surrounded by cool oceans
   with his matchless wheel of law that removes poverty
   and spreads his fame everywhere.
   ------
   9, 10. Let us worship Ganesa,
   the five-armed elephant god,
   the scholar of the four Vedas.
   He abides within the love of his devotees
   when they have only yogic thoughts
   and are without worldly desires.
   May he protect our king, the enemy of famine,
   the conquerer of all the lands in all eight directions,
   planted many pillars of victory,
   and rules the whole world under his one gracious umbrella.
   May he live long.
   -----
   11,12. Let us worship the feet of Murugan
   with twelve eyes and twelve matchless arms
   that are brighter than golden mountains.
   May the god give his grace to our emperor Abhayan,
   born in the sun dynasty
   and raised in the moon dynasty,
   making both royal families shine.
   May he rule all the lands surrounded by the oceans
   and all the directions under his one royal umbrella.
   ------
   13. Saraswathi, the goddess of art and literature
   abides on our king’s tongue.
   The beautiful goddess Lakshmi
   stays on a lotus
   and the goddess of victory shines,
   adorning our king’s arms.
   Let us praise them all.
   ------
   14. The goddess of the earth thinks,
   “My king has boundless good qualities
   and the goddess of fame lives with him.
   It is good for me to live with him also.”
   Thus she abides with the Chola king
   as he pleases and nurtures the earth goddess
   and covers her with his fame.
   Let us worship the goddess of earth
   so that our king may live long.
   ------
   15. When Kama, the god of love
   shot his arrows at Shiva,
   half of the fair body of Shiva,
   the god of gods, became dark,
   but Kama could not approach
   the lotus hands and feet of our goddess.
   Let us worship the flower-like ankleted feet
   of that powerful goddess, bowing our heads to her.
   ------
   16. Let us worship the goddess Parvathi
   so that king Abhayan may live forever and prosper,
   the protector of the Puzhi country
   and conqueror of the angry Pandyan king.
   He made the Pandyan king
   run to the forest in the hills,
   turning his feet red,
   He bent his bow and fought and defeated
   the Chera king and his warriors.
   -------
   17, 18 Let us worship the seven pairs of feet
   of the beautiful seven goddesses Chāmundi, Abhirāmi,
   Varāhi, Kaumāri, Mayeswari,
   Nārāyani, and Indrāni.
   They shine, lovely as vines.
   Let us worship them
   to make the matchless tiger banner flourish
   raised by the Chola king
   the conqueror of many kings
   whose banners are a boar, plough, deer,
   lion, bow and fish in the Himalayas.
   19. May the reciters of the Vedas prosper.
   May it rain to nourish the crops.
   May the crops that bring wealth thrive.
   May the creatures of the world live happily forever.
   20. May our king, the ruler of the world, prosper.
   May the magnificent tiger banner
   of our victorious emperor prosper.
   May his umbrella that protects the earth shine forever.
   May his hands that give generously prosper.
   -----------

               PART 2. Waiting for the Warriors. (Poems 21-74)
               Chapter 2. Kadaithirappu - Women and Warriors.

   Warriors returning from the war ask their women to open their doors.
   21. O lovely ones
   as sweet as the nectar
   that came from milky ocean,
   your young breasts are small as dice,
   your waists are as tiny as tudi drums
   and your long dark eyes touch your ears.
   Open your doors.
   22. Your breasts grow every day
   becoming large and round on both sides.
   Even scholars and sages
   with their minds controlled and without worldly desires,
   become weak when they see your still-growing breasts
   that are ample and round.
   Open your tall doors that are locked tight.
   23. Your curly hair shakes beautifully
   and you are as lovely as peacocks as they wake from sleep.
   When you walk your anklets sing beautifully.
   You speak softly and your words are as cool as dew.
   Open your doors.
   -
   24. When you cannot embrace
   the generous king Naradungan
   in your sweet dreams, you become angry
   and fight with him in the day. Open your tall doors.
   25. When your husbands embrace you,
   you pretend you are angry
   and prattle with your soft baby-like voices, saying,
   “Do not hold our dress,
   do not hold our dress.”
   But you really mean,
   “Do not let it fall! Do not let it fall!”
   You stand without moving, showing your love.
   O, girls, as lovely as swans, open the doors.
   26. You feel happy in your dreams
   and, thinking that all the love of the king Valavathungan
   belongs only to you,
   in the night you stroke
   the marks of his nails on your breasts.
   Open your doors.
   27. Even when you want to have a fight
   with your husbands, you smile.
   Happy, they come near you
   thinking that you are not angry with them anymore
   as you smile at them
   with your sweet coral-like mouths
   filled with teeth that glisten like diamonds.
   But then your eyes shed pearl-like tears.
   Open your doors, open your doors.
   28. O beautiful ones,
   when you pretend you are sleeping,
   your young husbands, worrying you may wake up,
   only hold your hands gently.
   But you continue to pretend to sleep
   and do not open your sharp eyes.
   Open your doors, open your doors.
   29. In the night, you have a dream
   that you are in a procession with our king,
   worshiped by his enemies,
   but it is only a dream and doesn’t happen in the day,
   so you tell your friends
   what happened in your dream in the night.
   Open your doors.
   30. You wear pearl chains
   and coral necklaces on your lovely breasts
   that the handsome red mouths
   of your husbands have kissed.
   Open your golden doors studded with diamonds.
   31. When your eyes fall on the lovely athi garland
   on the chest of the generous Chola monarch Mānadan
   you search for your eyes
   because you do not know where they have gone.
   Open your tall golden doors.
   32. Your fish-shaped eyes that reach to your ears
   and touch your beautiful ear rings are long and cruel
   like the weapons of our Chola king,
   adorned with a Vanji garland.
   He defeated the Pandyan king with his fish banner
   and made him run away frightened from his Kudal city.
   O, beautiful ones! Open your diamond-studded doors.
   33. When you embrace your husbands
   you are excited and cannot sleep.
   Your coral-like mouths and dark eyes become red.
   Your feelings cannot be controlled
   and you smile with joy.
   Open your doors.
   34. You are excited when you embrace your husbands
   and your clothes become loose.
   You take the bright rays of the moon
   thinking that they are your clothes
   and try to wear them.
   Open your doors.
   35. Even though the victorious king Jayadharan
   embraced you in the day, you think it was a dream.
   You tell your friends what you saw in your dream
   and when they tease you and laugh
   you realize that he really came and embraced you.
   Open your doors.
   36. O shy, lovely girls!
   Your husbands promised
   that they would not leave you
   but they went away and now you suffer.
   At night, your passion grows so strong
   you can only pretend to sleep.
   Open your adorned golden doors.
   37. Intoxicated, you didn’t know
   what you were doing
   and you slept on your husbands’ chests all night,
   making them beds of pleasure.
   Now you do not know dawn has come.
   Open your beautiful golden doors.
   38. You wait for your precious husbands to return
   but they have not come yet.
   You close your minds
   and doors in disappointment,
   but then open them immediately in hope.
   Open your doors.
   39. As you walk your two breasts
   look like two lovely lotus buds
   that bloomed on a green stalk
   that rose from your navel.
   Open your beautiful golden doors.
   40. When the Pandiyan kings with fish banners,
   were defeated by the Cholas and ran into the forest
   you were brought from the Pandyan kingdom
   and now are kept in Chola palaces.
   O lovely ones, open your doors.
   41. O women of the Kerala mountains
   and the Tulu country!
   You are the tribute given to the Chola kingdom
   that flourishes with abundant rolling water.
   Open the doors of your homes.
   42. O beautiful ones,
   your priceless chains dance on your breasts
   and your eyes dance, reaching to your earrings.
   You embrace the arms of your beloved husbands
   and dance like peacocks that dance on the hills!
   Open your doors.
   43. O girls of the Karnataka land!
   Mixing some Telugu with some Tamil
   you prattle sweet words like babies
   and walk softly to your doors.
   Open your golden doors.
   44. You wish to fight with your husbands
   when they embrace you,
   and you say “Don’t embrace me!”
   But then you faint when their hands
   that hold you become loose.
   Open your golden diamond-studded doors.
   45. When your passionate husbands
   come to love you, their eyes grow red.
   You see them and feel excited.
   You smile and tease them
   and their passion grows.
   Open your golden, decorated doors.
   46. O terivai women,
   you wake up with bright faces and smile.
   In one hand you hold your thick hair
   decorated with fragrant flowers
   and with the other you hold up
   your falling garments that flow everywhere.
   Open your doors.
   47. You remove your clothes
   when no one sees you
   and look at the marks of the nails
   of your husbands on your breasts.
   Looking at your breasts
   you feel like a poor person
   who suddenly gains wealth
   and your hearts are excited.
   Open your doors.
   48. Kama, the handsome god of love,
   thinks that your thick eyes
   have both the power of the poison
   and the sweetness of the nectar
   that rose from the milky ocean and he bows to you.
   Like Kama’s arrows that steal the hearts of all,
   your eyes steal the lives and feelings of those who love you.
   49. O beautiful ones,
   you walk smiling
   and your teeth, like a string of garlands,
   glisten on your lotus faces.
   Your teeth and your face shine
   like the crescent moon and full moon together
   and the light of both moons
   falls on the pearl chains
   that decorate your bud-like breasts.
   Come and open the doors.
   50. O beautiful ones,
   you pluck fragrant red lilies dripping with honey
   and with them you pluck
   the dear lives of innocent young men.
   You twist them and put them in your hair.
   Open your lovely golden doors.
   51. When your lovers embraced you tightly,
   they worried that they might have hurt you
   and left you gently and went away.
   You make circular drawings and think
   that they will come back soon
   and you shed cool tears on the sand and make it wet.
   Your tears erase the drawings on the floor,
   and you cry more and more. Open your doors.
   52. When you fight with your husbands,
   your bodies become pale.
   Your round tender coconut-like breasts grow thin.
   Your red-lined eyes that are like karuvilam flowers
   shed tears. Open your tall golden doors.
   53. When you are with your lovers
   your thick bound hair becomes loose.
   The bands on your waist
   and your other ornaments grow slack
   but both of your breasts stay firm.
   Such is your nature. Open your doors.
   54. O beautiful ones,
   when you feel love for your husbands,
   you begin to speak nervously.
   Your sword-like eyes become red,
   and your red lips become pale.
   The moisture in your mouth becomes palm wine,
   and you cannot think anymore.
   Such is your nature. Open your doors.
   55. To cure the wounds
   your husbands received in war,
   you put your warm round breasts on them,
   and the medicine that they receive
   are the kisses that you give
   with your mouths as sweet as fruit.
   Open your tall pure golden doors.
   56. O beautiful ones,
   you have wounded the young warriors
   by looking at them with your spear-like eyes.
   You embrace them
   with your soft hands and your two breasts
   and that embrace is medicine to cure their wounds.
   Open your doors.
   57. O lovely girls,
   the bees that swarm around your hair
   to drink honey from the flowers,
   afraid that your waists may break
   because of their weight,
   fly away, but then they return because
   their only refuge is your hair.
   They fly away from your hair,
   come back and swarm around it again and again.
   Such is the beauty of your hair,
   Open your decorated doors.
   58. O young women,
   your shining anklets seem to cry out,
   “Stop walking, stop walking!
   If both your breasts move,
   your waists will break, they will break.
   You are our refuge, You are our refuge!”
   Open your doors.
   59. O beautiful shy women!
   Bees swarm around your hair
   decorated with fragrant flowers.
   Your quarreling fish-eyes dart back and forth.
   Your walk is as graceful as the Kaviri river
   where waves break on both of its shores,
   fish swim and frolic
   and fragrant flowers dripping with honey
   bloom everywhere. Open your tall golden doors.
   60. O arivai women,
   the bees that swarm around your thick hair
   are like a roof that shades you
   because they worry that the moon will rise
   and pour its bright rays on your vase-like breasts
   smeared with sandal paste.
   Open your doors.
   61. O lovely ones,
   when you embrace your husbands,
   your eyes steal the redness of your mouths,
   and your mouths steal
   the whiteness of your flower-like eyes.
   From your mouths you give
   the nectar of love to your husbands.
   Open your shining doors.
   62. O beautiful ones,
   your foreheads that are like crescent moons,
   sweat with small drops of pearl-like water.
   The chains on your breasts swing.
   Your thick forest-like hair
   decorated with chengaluneer flowers
   becomes disheveled.
   The bangles on your hands tinkle loudly
   but you do not stop embracing your husbands.
   Open your doors, Open your doors.
   63. O shy ones,
   when you embrace your husbands,
   the strings around your waists do not move,
   but your lovely dresses become loose.
   We sing the praise of our king of Kanchi city
   the conquerer of destroyed the Kalinga country.
   Open the doors and let us praise our king.
   64. Listen to the valor of Karunagaran
   who sent his cruel arrows and conquered Lanka.
   We sing the praise of Karunagaran
   conquerer of the Kalinga country.
   Open your doors.
   65. When you are separated
   from your loving husbands,
   you think of all their mistakes
   and are distressed,
   but then you see them and you forget everything.
   Open your lovely golden doors.
   66. When you play with your husbands,
   your fragrant breasts dance on your chests.
   Bees sing swarming around your long hair
   decorated with flower garlands dripping with honey.
   Your eyes dart and touch your ears and dance.
   Open your doors.
   67. O beautiful, shy girls,
   you silence the mouths of your parrots
   when they repeat the words you spoke
   when you embraced your husbands
   in the excitement of love.
   Open your golden doors studded with jewels.
   68. Every day you shiver
   and are afraid of staying alone
   where the bright moon shines.
   You enter into a room
   where there is no moonlight
   but you are afraid of staying there also
   because it is dark.
   Open your beautiful golden doors.
   69. You think, “He will come!”
   and open the doors.
   You think “He will not come!” and close the doors.
   You open and close your doors all night until dawn
   and the knobs on your doors become loose.
   Open your doors.
   70. O sweet terivais,
   you quarrel with your husbands
   but then when they make peace with you,
   you love them.
   In your excitement you seem to lose your minds
   and search for them. Open the doors.
   71. Your lovers pacify you by saying,
   “Your words are musical and as sweet as nectar.”
   You want them to praise you more
   and you kill them with your murderous looks.
   Open your tall golden doors.
   72. O beautiful shy ones,
   you are afraid that your husbands
   who never stop loving you
   will be parted from you.
   Your eyes shed tears like rain.
   You mark the floor with your toes over the tears
   that have fallen from your eyes. Open your doors.
   73. The beauty of your waists decorated with kanchi ornaments
   and your round hill-like breasts
   torment your husbands.
   You take away their lives with your love.
   Open your beautiful golden doors.
   74. O lovely women!
   You take the dark red kaluneer flowers
   and the hearts of young men of this world
   and put them both on your hair.
   Open your beautiful golden doors.
   ------------

                   PART 3. Kādu, Kovil and Devi (75 -133)
 The Forest and The Temple of the Goddess and the description of her. Kādu,
                               Kovil and Devi.
           Chapter 3. Kādu pādiyadu. Song of the Forest (75 -96)

   The Forest of the Goddess
   75. Let me sing the praise
   of the forest of the goddess.
   She gives her grace to the peys and fills their stomachs
   with the porridge they have made
   from the flesh and fat of the Kalinga warriors
   who died in the war.
   76. In the forest many trees can be seen—
   burnt kārai trees, black cuurai trees,
   veerai trees that smoke with fire,
   burnt bamboo trees,
   the bark of pārai trees split off and fallen down,
   burnt pālai trees, and dried oomai trees,
   77. Fallen vellil trees,
   shrunken nelli trees,
   dried thumpai and vel trees
   split mulli plants,
   destroyed valli trees,
   split kalli plants—
   all are spread throughout the forest.
   78. Dried vakai trees, shrunken kuhai roots,
   ruined thetri trees, fallen pieces of vel trees,
   hardened ekai creepers, split bamboo trees,
   broken pungu trees, all are spread throughout the forest.
   79. Why does the sun enter into all the open places
   in the cruel burning forest?
   Does he search with his rays without stopping
   for the paths where his wife’s shadow
   Shayai might have gone?
   80. The terrible eagles that circle around
   with their shadows
   look as if they are frightened of the heat
   and when they fly away from the burning forest
   they fly so fast without stopping
   that even their shadows can’t be seen.
   81. The shadows of the trees are frightened
   and move away from the trunks of the trees
   because they think,
   “If we stay here anymore
   the sun may dry us with its heat,
   or the dried-out trees may drink us up
   because they cannot find any water.”
   82. The burning red ground
   looks like a metal plate made of melted fire.
   The doves that fly above look like smoke
   rising from the flaming ground.
   83. The mouths of thirsty deer become dry
   and they try to drink water from the burning fields.
   They lick the ground with their tongues
   but there is no water and as they try to drink
   they choke on the saliva that forest dogs have drooled.
   84. How could it be possible for anyone on earth
   to walk through that burning forest?
   Even the powerful gods in the sky
   do not put their feet on that ground
   because they fear its heat will burn them,
   85. Listen, I will tell you
   why the sun does not ride on his wonderful horses
   in the sky day and night.
   Surely the horses will grow tired
   if they must return at night
   without rest and cross through the heat
   of the forest of the Anangu.
   86. The white moon and the dark clouds,
   thinking they should somehow cross the forest,
   move slowly, but it is so hot that they begin to run fast.
   Doesn’t the sweat that they shed as they run,
   fall as rain and dew on the earth?
   87. Do you know why the gods in the sky
   use the clouds as a screen for shade
   and the nectar-dripping moon to fan themselves?
   Isn’t it because they cannot bear
   the terrible heat that comes from the forest?
   88. The burning trees, blackened and smoking,
   look like peys that cannot run away from the forest.
   They stand, weep and sigh
   because the goddess Modi has ordered them to stay there.
   89. Old snakes that come out
   of the holes from the tall dried trees,
   look like lean old, hungry peys.
   They extend their dried tongues,
   from their waterless mouths.
   90. People walk in the forest
   and search for water all around and their eyes
   move like a ranging whirlwind.
   They see a water-like mirage in the desert
   that seems to float all around them
   but when they run near to drink the water,
   they cannot find any.
   91. As the whirlwind blows away the ashes
   of the burned bodies of the warriors
   the jewels that were buried
   in the burned ash-covered ground
   shine like fire covered with smoke.
   92. The dried-out bamboo plants,
   unable to stand on the earth,
   spit out pearls that look like tears.
   Do they shed tears
   because they pity the desert for its heat?
   93. The pearls thrown out from the bamboo plants
   and scattered all over the ground
   look like drops of water
   that the forest sweats because of the heat.
   Do they look like blisters on the forest’s body?
   94. The strong waves of the ocean
   break constantly on the banks,
   and the elephants of the eight directions
   wave their ears like fans
   because they want to protect
   themselves from the heat of the wind
   that blows from the large hot forest.
   95. The forest where the goddess Anangu stays
   looks like the battlefield
   where our famous king Abhayan fought angrily
   with his enemies, the Pandiyans.
   The Pandyan kings ran away on paths
   filled with stones and thorns
   and crossed the rivers Vellaru and Kottaru
   that were filled with smoke that rose from the war.
   96. The monkeys in the Anangu’s forest
   that want to fight for our king
   as the monkeys did in Lanka
   cannot find any sand
   and cannot build a bridge.
   -----------

      Chapter 4. Koyil Pādiyadu. Song of the Temple - poems (97 -120)

   The peys building a temple for the goddess.
   97. I will describe the new temple
   that the peys built for the Anangu
   even though the god Brahma had built
   an old temple in the forest before.
   98. The peys placed in the foundation of the temple
   large diamonds of the queens of the enemy kings
   of our king Mānadan, the conquerer.
   He fought his enemies with his shining sword
   and sent them to the world of Yama,
   and he sits under his royal umbrella and rules.
   99. The peys built the walls of the temple
   by piling up the dark heads of the Chera warriors.
   They were ordered to fight by their kings and lost their lives
   and their blood and fat were mixed and used
   as cement to build the walls.
   100. The peys built the pillars
   and the beams of the temple
   with large trees that the Chola elephants
   broke from the forts of the enemy kings
   of our king Abhayan, the patron of the learned.
   101. The peys constructed
   the vertical and the horizontal beams
   for the ceiling of the temple
   using the tusks and the large bones of the elephants
   that died in the war in Mythila city.
   102. The peys decorated the ceiling of the temple
   with the yazhi, elephant, boar
   and lion banners of the enemy kings
   that were brought from the battlefield
   where our king Abhayan fought and conquered
   his enemy Virudarajan and other kings.
   103. The peys covered the roof of the temple
   and decorated it with the face cloth
   of the angry elephants that fought in the battle
   where our king Cholasekaran fought with his shining sword
   in the bloody war on the banks of the Thungabathra river,
   and conquered his enemy kings.
   (Note: Kulothungan I, fought with the king of Kundalam, Vikramadithiya
   VI,
   and his brother Jeyadungan on the banks of the Thungabatra river and
   conquered them.)
   104. The peys whose mouths are like burning wood,
   built the towers and the tall walls of the temple
   that shine like silver, with the white bones
   of the warriors they protected and guarded.
   105. Strong peys planted two beautiful pillars
   at the front door of temple,
   bent a dark iron rod, and connected the pillars.
   They hung crocodile-shaped decorations on the rods.
   106. The peys hung the heads of warriors and children
   as decorations for the walls,
   and the cloths made of fat for the the temple’s curtains.
   107. The peys hung on the walls of the temple,
   the winnow-like ears of the elephants
   of the Pandyans who did not obey the Cholas.
   They used the crocodile-shaped decorations from Madurai
   and hung them like swings studded with diamonds.
   108. The pey devotees of the goddess
   swept the temple, cleaned its floor
   using fresh blood as water,
   and sprinkled fat as flowers.
   Doesn’t the fat that they sprinkled,
   look like shining lights that brighten the forest?
   109. The strong heroic warriors, never weary of fighting,
   worship the goddess and say,
   “Give us the boons that we want
   and we will cut off parts of our body
   and offer them to you.”
   The loud sound of their pleas
   spreads everywhere
   like the roaring sound of the ocean.
   110. No one can describe
   the power of the sacrificial fire
   that the warriors made
   with their chest bones for firewood.
   They used the blood that drips from their bodies
   as ghee to worship the goddess.
   111. The warriors cut off their own heads
   and gave them into Anangu’s hands.
   Those heads praised Korravai, the goddess of victory
   as the headless trunks
   stood and worshipped her.
   112. The andalai birds that saw
   the heads with long hair that the warriors had cut off
   and put on the large sacrificial mounds
   thought they were also andalai birds,
   but when they went near, them,
   they were frightened.
   113. Some warriors cut off their heads for sacrifice
   and thought, “We are cutting off our heroic heads
   and our duties are over
   and there is nothing more for us to do.”
   Some hungry peys saw the headless bodies
   wandering around and were pleased,
   wishing to eat them.
   They went behind the bodies
   hoped that the bodies would fall.
   114. Some warriors shouted,
   “O goddess, here is the fresh blood
   of a bull killed today.
   Take this as our offering!”
   Roaring like thunder the voices of those warriors
   rose above and split the sky
   and sounded like many drums beaten together.
   115. A group of peys, the Sādagās,
   the guards of the goddess from ancient time,
   came to the forest
   when they heard the sound of the drums
   and the goddess Amari was pleased to see them.
   116. The Yogini girls walked and chattered
   carrying swords in their right hands
   and fresh heads of the warriors in their left.
   They approached the goddess as their waists swayed.
   117. The peys were terrified to see the heads of the warriors
   that hung from the tops of the long bamboo trees,
   their eyes wide open, looking around and laughing.
   The peys could not close their eyes to sleep at night
   thinking of those heads of the warriors.
   118. The large heads of the warriors
   hanging and swaying on long bamboo poles
   and dripping blood everywhere like rain
   looked like Yama’s long hook thrown
   to take the lives of the warriors.
   119. The peys with their fire-like mouths,
   searching for food for their babies,
   approached the murderous foxes whose screams
   were like the sound of large drums,
   and they grabbed the meat from their mouths.
   120. The burning ground was filled
   with vultures that ate fat and flesh
   and the forest was filled
   with fire, cotton, rotten corpses, peys,
   and fighting foxes.
   ------------

   Chapter 5. Deviyaip pādiyadu. Song of Praise of the Goddess. (poems 121
                                   - 132 )

   121. Why should I describe the clothes and the ornaments
   on the body of the goddess saying
   “She has this, She has that" as others do?
   I will describe the parts of the body of goddess Modi
   that the devotees worship and praise.
   122. Her tender feet are decorated with anklets
   studded with large diamonds, pearls and stars
   and the cord used to tie the jewels
   is Adisesha, the snake, the bed of Vishnu
   who carries the earth
   and the snake Vasuki that was used as the rope
   when the milky ocean was churned.
   123. The goddess Kali dances
   praising the famous king Jayadharan
   the conquerer of the world,
   whom the Parani poems praise.
   When she dances and puts one foot on the earth
   carried by Adisesha and the elephants of eight directions
   that guard the world,
   she makes a hole in the earth so it shakes.
   124. The goddess decorates her breasts,
   that look like two pots filled with nectar
   with beautiful pearl-colored powder
   and marks them with her own signet.
   Then she goes to the forest of Shiva
   wishing to unite with him, the rider of a bull
   with the beautiful white crescent moon in his matted hair.
   125. When Anangu embraced the god
   with an eye on his forehead and long matted hair,
   the highest god Shiva was pleased
   and gave her an elephant skin for a dress,
   the intestines of the elephant for her belt,
   and a snake to tie around her waist.
   The goddess was pleased to wear them all.
   126. Her divine womb
   gave birth to Brahma, the creator of the Vedas,
   Vishnu, dark as a cloud,
   Ganesha dripping with ichor
   and Murugan bright as gold,
   the strong god with a spear,
   who, bending his bow, shot his arrows,
   and destroyed the clan of Asuras.
   127. To please Shiva,
   the goddess wears white pearl and coral chains
   on her golden breasts.
   For her upper cloth, she ties a snake that spits fire
   on her chest and then she goes to see
   Shiva, strong as an elephant,
   and stays in the Kailasa hills
   wearing the skin of an elephant
   that eats round balls of food and drips ichor.
   128. When the goddess takes in her hands the blood
   that pours like rain from the heads
   sacrificed by the warriors and drinks it up,
   her hands become red
   and when she washes them in the ichor
   dripping from the elephants, they become black.
   Thus her lotus-like hands shine red and black.
   129. When the gods and the asuras
   churned the milky ocean,
   golden Meru mountain melted,
   the wide oceans smoked without water,
   and all the directions became hot.
   Then when Shiva drank the poison
   that came out of the milky ocean
   and his neck became dark,
   the goddess gave him water like nectar
   from her lips as sweet as fruits
   and saved Shiva, the lord of the Himalayas.
   130. The goddess melts for the goodness
   of her devotees and shows compassion to them
   and takes away the enmity of all the worlds.
   She has small pearl-like teeth,
   coral-like lips and a divine face.
   She speaks innocently like a baby prattling.
   She looks in all directions with her beautiful eyes
   that extend to her ears.
   131. The goddess’s face shines like the bright moon,
   the ancestor of the famous Vengi dynasty
   that is as great and ancient as the Vedas,
   in which our king, virtuous and just Abhayan, was born.
   The kumkum on her face shines like the sun,
   the ancestor of Chola dynasty.
   132. If the goddess wears on both ears
   the great mountains of the earth
   they become her earrings.
   If she strings the hills on a rope
   and wears them on her chest,
   they become her chain.
   133. If she holds mountains in her lotus hands,
   she can use them as ammānai balls
   or kazangu to play with.
   Is there anything that
   she cannot do if she wants?
   --------------

            PART 4 Peys : Description of the Peys (verses152-211)
The story of the Pey from the Himalayas, its magic and it tells all the Peys,
                       the history of the Chola kings
         as it was described by Narada to him. (Chapters 6, 7 and 8)
         Chapter 6. Peyhalaip pādiyadu. Song of the Peys (134 -152)

   Description of the peys.
   134. All the divine beings
   worship the feet of mighty Anangu.
   I will describe the alagais of the Anangu,
   staying with her always and obeying her orders
   135. The peys grow thinner every day,
   and because they are hungry
   their stomachs look like big empty pots
   and their hands and legs
   look like tall dark palm trees in the forest.
   136. Their mouths compete with deep caves
   because they want to be deeper than they are.
   Their stomachs are never full
   however much they have eaten.
   When they sit bending their long legs,
   their knees rise four and a half feet above their faces.
   137. Their thin, fleshless bodies look like unburned wood
   and their bones stick together with their nerves.
   They shout often, “We do not get any porridge
   from the battlefield where men are killed
   and we are weak now. How could you ask us to work?”
   138. Their cheeks are so thin that they stick together
   inside their mouths and cannot be pulled apart.
   Their eyes are as bright as burning torches
   and look like small round hills with deep caves
   where one can enter and see inside.
   139. Their dried backs without any flesh
   look like boats that are overturned.
   Their large navels look like holes
   where snakes and huge lizards can enter and sleep.
   140. The hair on their bodies hangs like snakes
   and the holes on their old noses are filled with moss.
   Owls live in their ears
   and bats fly back and forth between their two ears.
   141. Their teeth are like the tips
   of axes and plows arranged together.
   They use snakes for their thali chains
   and chameleons for their pendants.
   Their heads touch the sky and split it.
   They have long lips that hang down and touch their chests.
   142. If the baby Alahais see the bamboo plants near them,
   they shout, “Mother, mother!”.
   If the mother Alahais see thin camels,
   they say, “These are my children, my children!”
   and carry them on their waists.
   143. The peys are so hungry
   that their stomachs have burned
   like the forest where the Pandiyan king
   hid with his fish banner
   when he was chased by our king Abhayan
   who holds a tiger banner and gives with his golden hands
   more to the world than the clouds.
   144. The peys do not get any food and they think,
   “Our death is near!”
   They worship the goddess Anangu,
   and stay near her without moving even once
   from wherever she tells them to stay.
   145. Some peys of the Anangu are lame
   because they slipped and fell
   and broke their ankles on the brains
   of our king’s enemies that spilled
   and spread all over the battlefield
   where our king Abhayan’s
   elephants that can attack lions fought.
   146. Some peys of Anangu have broken their right hands because when
   they made porridge,
   pounding the white teeth of the warriors as rice
   and using the tusks of the elephants for pestles,
   the pestles hurt them on the battlefield
   where our king Virudaraja bhayangaran fought his enemies.
   147. Some peys of the Anangu are blind
   because the hot porridge that they cooked
   mixing blood and intestines
   splashed and blinded them in one eye
   on the battlefield of Chakkarakkottam, where our king, Virudarāja
   Bhayankaran, conquered his enemies.
   148. Some peys of the Anangu are dumb
   because when they cooked sweet hot porridge
   on the battlefield in Madurai,
   praising the king of the Ponni river that nurtures the fields,
   and ate it hot, their tongues burned
   and they became dumb and unable to speak.
   149. Some peys cannot hear because they became deaf
   when they heard the roaring sound
   of the victorious warriors on the battlefield
   where our Chola king Abhayan,
   adorned with the aimbadaithali ornament,
   conquered his enemies in the city of Thimiri,
   riding on his horse that was so strong
   that it could fight an elephant.
   150. Some peys of Anangu are short
   because the Chola peys brought short female bhudams
   that served the Pandiyan warriors, died in the war
   and married them and their new wives
   gave birth to short baby bhudams.
   151. Some peys of the Anangu are hunch-backed
   because when a group of them bathed,
   swimming in the stream of blood,
   they got sick with kurakkuvādam
   and became hunch-backed on the battlefield
   where the Chola king Gangaikonda Cholan fought
   and destroyed the country of Kadāram
   surrounded with wide, sounding oceans.
   152. Some peys of the Anangu have broken fingers
   because they were cooks and they entered the ocean,
   swam and hurt their fingers on the battlefield
   where our Chola king fought ferociously
   and conquered Lanka and the southern Pandiyan country.
   -----------

    Chapter 7. Indira jālam - The Magic show by a Pey. (poems 153- 177)

   A pey ran away to the Himalayas because he was afraid of the goddess
   and returned
   from the Himalayas and showed the magic that he has learnt there,
   to the goddess and the servant peys.
   153. The cot for the goddess was made of bones,
   tied with intestines and painted with red blood.
   Small bhudams sat under the cot
   and they became the legs of the cot.
   The goddess sat on the cot
   and the peys stood around her and whispered to her.
   154. On the cot five mattresses were piled
   and peys were bent and made into pillows.
   Bedsheets were made of the white fat of warriors
   as moonlight fell on the bed to make it bright.
   155. The goddess protects the Cholas
   and destroys the Pandiyans in the war.
   She carries a pindipalam weapon and sat on the bed.
   Idahinis, her female servants,
   stood around both sides of her bed
   and fanned her to chase away the flies.
   156. The tall chief pey of the temple held a stick
   decorated with the nerves and bones of elephants,
   and came near the goddess and worshipped her.
   He wore a shirt made of fat
   and decorated with the intestines
   of warriors that had died in the war.
   157, 158. The chief pey of the temple said,
   “A messenger was sent
   by the Chola king Suraguru to Yama,
   and he cut off his head and gave it to you as a sacrifice.
   But a thief pey stole that head and ate it.
   You cut off that thief pey’s head
   and put it on the messenger’s body.
   Some of the relatives of that thief pey
   were afraid of you and the Chola king
   and ran away from here.
   You know them all in your divine heart.
   Some of the peys ran away and one of them
   went to the Himalayas and came back and told me,
   ‘I am a devotee of the goddess and I want to see her.”
   This pey has not done anything wrong.
   What is your gracious order?”
   159. The Anangu heard the request
   and ordered, “Bring him!”
   and the temple pey called the pey from the Himalayas
   and he came slowly near the Anangu,
   worshipped her and said,
   “I was worried about coming here,
   but I am approaching you
   because you have ordered me to come.
   O Anangu, forgive me and give me your grace.”
   160. The Anangu said, “When I cut off the head
   of the thieving kuli pey
   and put his head on the headless pey,
   I forgave all of you and there is no reason for you to worry.”
   The Pey from Himalaya says:
   161. The pey from the Himalayas
   worshipped the goddess and said,
   “I am saved by your kindness.
   When I stayed in the hills of Himalayas,
   I learned thousands of fine magical tricks.
   Please sit, look at them and enjoy.”
   Then the pey from the Himalayas
   showed the scenes of war with his magic
   and described them
   as the goddess and all other peys looked on.
   162. He said, “O goddess,
   show us your grace with your kind eyes.
   Do you see the elephant trunks on my hand?
   When I make them come into my other hand,
   they change into the heads of angry elephants.
   163. “O goddess, See! The peys drink the blood
   that comes from the elephants’ heads,
   scream like loud thunder, and run around in circles.
   See! there are headless bodies floating there.
   164. “Hail to our goddess!
   There is so much to show you!
   See the terrible fight
   on the battlefield in the city of Kadakkam
   where king Abhayan got victory.
   See now that great Parani of the battlefield!
   165. “O goddess, see the horses falling and dying!
   See how the limbs cut from their bodies throb!
   See how the rutting elephants are frightened and run away!
   See the blood flowing like hundreds of rivers!
   166. “O goddess, see how the arms that were cut off
   float in the blood of rivers.
   See the long intestines that float there.
   See how the foxes pull the broken legs of the warriors to eat
   and slip on the warriors’ brains.
   167. “O goddess, see the fat
   and see how the ground stinks with it!
   See the battlefield filled with corpses.
   And see some of the stranger peys
   that do not belong to us.”
   168. When the pey from the Himalayas
   showed all these things,
   the other peys thought everything was real
   and were frightened.
   Then, wanting to eat the illusory meat they had seen,
   they fell one over the other on the empty floor
   and broke their legs.
   169. The peys that fell on the floor,
   shouted “Here is fresh blood!”
   They scooped and scooped the imaginary blood
   with their empty hands, got up and then fell again.
   They searched for the meat on the floor
   thinking that the flesh that they had in their hands
   might have fallen.
   170. The peys said,
   “We got clothes made of fat to wear!”
   and they tied imaginary cloths of fat around their waists
   with their empty hands.
   They bit the air and ground their teeth
   as if they were biting the heads of the warriors.
   171. One thin pey, looked like a rope on a hanging pot,
   imagined that there were bodies on the floor
   and tried to grab them.
   The other peys also ground their teeth,
   and fell on the floor one over another
   and tried to grab bodies where there were none.
   172. Because the peys fell on the floor,
   their nails huge as winnows broke
   and their faces became hot and wounded.
   The Yogini women saw them
   and laughed swaying and bending their waists
   so much that it seemed their chest bones might break.
   173. When they saw the magic of the pey
   from the Himalayas,
   the peys wanted to eat flesh and became very hungry.
   They worshiped their ruler, Anangu,
   trembled and told her, “All of us will die.
   Please stop the magic of the Himalayan pey right now!”
   174. The pey from the Himalayas
   worshipped the goddess and said to her,
   “All the scholars of arts and other skills
   come to our victorious king Abhayan
   with a shining sword
   and ask him if he would like to see all the tricks
   that they have learned.
   Our king sees all our magic
   and you should also see my magic
   and give me your grace.”
   175. All the other peys said,
   “O magician, O sinner!
   If you do any more magic and hurt us,
   we swear on our queen Anangu that it is not right.”
   The Anangu told the pey from the Himalayas,
   “Now stop your magic.
   Tell us where have you learned all your tricks.”
   176, 176. The pey from the Himalayas said.
   “When you and the king Suraguru became angry at me,
   I was afraid, and thought that I should not stay here,
   and went to the Himalayas.
   There Auvai taught me many kinds of magic
   and told me that your anger will go away
   if I go to you and show you my tricks.
   She also said that the divine Rudra Yogini
   is your old devotee
   and I could learn many things from her.
   She asked me to stay with her.
   And so I spent some time there learning magic.”
   ------------

               Chapter 8. irāca pārampariyam (Poems 178-211)

   History of the Chola Dynasty told by the Pey to the goddess as he heard
   from sage Naradar.
   (Nāradar, the sage told the history and the victories and history of
   the Chola kings before and
   after the king Karikālan. Karikālan inscribed the history of the Chola
   kings as Nāradar told him
   on the hills of the Himalayas. The speaker of the first part of this
   section is the pey from the
   Himalayas and later the Anangu.)
   The Pey from Himalaya says:
   178. When the Chola king Karikālan went
   to the northern countries to fight,
   the Himalaya mountain stopped him.
   He turned the hill upside down with a chendu weapon, planted his tiger
   banner on it and said
   to Himalaya, “May you become as before!”
   and made the hill straight again.
   179. Nārada, the divine sage, the scholar of the Vedas,
   who knows past, present and future, came there,
   praised and blessed the king Karikālan and said,
   “O king, there is no one equal to you
   on this earth surrounded by oceans!
   There is one thing I would like to tell you. Listen!”
   180. Nārada continued,
   “In ancient times the sage Vyāsa, the son of Parasarar,
   told the story of Bharatham to the elephant-headed Ganesa
   and Ganesa wrote the story with one hand,
   using his tusk as a pen.
   It is hard to describe the great benefit
   that the world received
   because of that wonderful work.
   181. “The divine stories of Bharatham
   and the stories of the highest gods in it
   are all like the true and ancient four Vedas.
   This Chola history that I am going to tell you
   is as great as the stories of the Vedas.
   You must inscribe this history
   on the summit of the Himalayas.
   Listen to this famous history.
   182. “Vishnu is the first one of Chola dynasty.
   No one can describe him and his power.
   He is the creator of the world and its seven divisions,
   and the creator of humanity, praised by gods.
   183. “Vishnu engendered the sages
   and they created the Rgveda, the Upanishads, the Ashtagams,
   the Sangidais and all the other sastras.
   Together, these contain the rules that instruct
   all people how to live.
   184. “Brahma was born from the lotus
   growing from the navel of Vishnu
   and all the Chola kings, protecting the earth
   were born in the dynasty of Brahma.
   Chola history is like the faultless Vedas
   because the ancestors of the Cholas
   are Vishnu and Brahma themselves.
   The god Vishnu of the Vedas
   was to be born as king Abhayan.”
   185. The sage Nārada told the history of the Cholas
   beginning with Vishnu
   who sleeps on a snake bed as Adisesha
   and presents himself to his devotees.
   Nārada told the history up to Abhayan,
   the king and the protector of this earth, and then departed.
   The king Karikālan continued telling the history
   as Nārada had told him on the Himalayas.
   The pey from the Himalayas continues to tell the the history of the
   Cholas to the Anangu.
   186. “Brahma was born from the lotus
   from the divine navel of the ancient one, Vishnu.
   The great Marici was the son of Brahma,
   and Kasiban, the compassionate king,
   was the son of Marici,
   and the bright Sun god was born to Kasiban.
   187. “King Manu, the son of Kasiban,
   placed his son under the wheels of a chariot
   to do justice to a mother cow who lost her calf
   because the careless prince had killed it
   when he drove his chariot.
   Even today, when the world hears his story,
   it marvels at the wonderful sacrifice of the king.
   King Ikuvagu was born to Manu.
   188. “Ikuvāgu’s son was Vihuchi,
   and Kāhustan, the heroic one was born to Vihuchi.
   The strong king Kāhustan, riding on an elephant,
   conquered all the asuras
   and helped the thousand-eyed Indra and the other gods.
   189. “Kāhustan’s son Mandāda
   was known for his kindness.
   In his kingdom angry tigers and innocent deer
   stayed on the same riverbank and drank water.
   His son was the famous Musuhundan
   and he conquered all the lands of the gods
   and ruled them majestically.
   190. “The king Brudulakshan
   helped the gods in the sky
   by giving them the sweet nectar
   when they and the asuras churned the ocean of milk.
   The Chola king Sibi cut his flesh
   and put it on a scale to save a dove.
   191. “The Surādirājan was the first king of the Chola dynasty,
   and he gave the titles Rājakesari and Parakesari
   to the future Cholas.
   The Chola kings with those titles
   conquered and ruled all the seven worlds
   under the tiger banner.
   192. “The Chola king Killivalavan
   argued with Yama and told him what was right.
   King Kāveran brought the river Kāveri
   to the Chola country.
   The king Mrtyujit conquered Yama and told him
   not to take lives in his country without warning.
   193. “The Chola king Chitran conquered Indra
   and made him the tiger on the Chola banner.
   The Chola king Samutrajit dug a channel
   to connect the eastern and the western oceans
   so that ships could go from one side to the other.
   The Chola king Panjapan cut his finger and gave his blood
   to the five thirsty yakshas.
   When a Chola king could not cross the ocean
   in his boats because there was no wind,
   he called Varuna and that god of wind came to help him.
   Because the god Varuna obeyed him, the king gained the title,
   Varunarājanaip Panikondavan.
   194. “The Chola king Thungeyil Erinta Cholan
   protected all the kings and his people.
   He conquered the asuras, flew over their three forts
   and brought affliction to everyone.
   The Chola king Ubarisaran flew on a sky chariot
   studded with diamonds.
   A Chola king increased dharma
   and gave his navy to the Pandavas
   until the Mahabharatha war ended.
   195. “When the king Killivalavan went
   to the underworld, he saw a Nāga princess
   with lovely spear-like eyes and white pearl-like teeth.
   He fell in love with her and married her.
   The Chola king Chenkanān released the Chera king
   Kanaikkāl irumporai from prison
   when the poet Poyhaiyār sang
   the Kalavalzi Nārpadu in praise of the Chola king.
   196. “Karikālvalavan had inscribed
   the history of his ancestors as Nārada had told him on the Himalayas
   and returned to his country.
   He rode on a strong elephant,
   conquered the Pandyan and Chera kings
   and the goddess of victory adorned his shoulders.
   197. “Karikālan obtained a picture
   of his enemy king Pradābarudran
   and put out one of his eyes
   on the picture because Pradābarudran obstructed
   his workers when they built up the banks of the Kaveri river.
   198. “Karikālan conquered the city Kuruvi
   surrounded with ponds where fish frolic.
   He gave a hundred thousand gold coins
   to the Tamil poet Rudra Kannanār
   for composing the poem
   Pattinappālai that praises him.
   199. “Karikālan conquered the Chera king Perunjerālathan
   and the Pandiyan king Nedunjeliyan, never retreated from battle,
   and he made them wear torn clothes
   and carry lamps on their heads.
   200. “The Chola king Parānthahan
   riding on his elephant went to many countries under the sky and
   conquered them all.
   He conquered the Pandiyan land and Lanka and his fame spread
   everywhere.
   (Parānthahan I, has the title “Veeranārāyanan.” He was the grandson of
   Vijayalaya Cholan and son of Adithya I)
   201. “The Chola king Rajarajan I,
   the son of Parāndahan, started a festival
   on Sadaya Patchatram in the Chera country.
   He rode on a matchless elephant like the rising sun,
   conquered Udagai city and took many elephants.
   202. “The king Rajendra Cholan I, son of Rajaraja Cholan I,
   went to the northern lands where the Ganges flows
   and ferociously conquered them.
   In the city of Mannai, he fed Ganges water
   to his elephants that fought in the war.
   He conquered the country of Kadāram
   surrounded with roaring oceans with cool white waves
   and ruled it under his royal umbrella.
   203. “The Chola king Rajadhirājan I
   conquered the city of Kampili
   and planted his pillar of victory there.
   He rode on his elephant
   that was decorated with a kimburi ornament,
   fought in Kalyānapuram and conquered that city.
   He stamped his tiger seal
   on all the mountains in all directions.
   204. “The king Rajendra Chola, strong as an elephant,
   the grandson of Vijayālaya Cholan,
   riding on his victorious elephant,
   conquered his enemy king
   in the city of Koppai on the bank of the Krishna river
   and was crowned on the battlefield.
   Sitting beneath his royal umbrella,
   he protected the world.
   (The Chola king Rājendran was crowned on the battlefield when his
   brother Rājādhirājan
   died in the war as they both fought opposing the Chalukya king
   Agavamallan in the city Koppai,
   on the banks of Krishna river.)
   205. “The Chola king Rājamahendran,
   followed new traditions
   different than those of the Vedas,
   the first books that described ancient traditions.
   The traditions that this king followed were superior to the laws of
   Manu.
   He protected dharma and made it flourish
   as he sat beneath his royal umbrella and ruled the kingdom.
   206. “King Veerarājendran, brother of Rājamahendran,
   fought with his enemies and conquered the Kunthalars
   in the city of Kudala-sangamam
   and protected his people.
   After Veerarājendran, Kulothungan I,
   became the Chola king and the world praised him, saying,
   “What tapas has the earth goddess done for the king Abhyan to become
   king to protect her?”
   207. “As long as all the three worlds abide,
   as long as the Vedas of the well-born abide,
   as long as the hills and the oceans on this earth abide,
   king Abhayan will rule this earth with justice
   and protect it.
   208. “Without missing anything
   king Karikālan wrote down
   the matchless history of the Cholas
   and their ancient dynasty as Nāradar narrated it
   on the summit of the Himalayas
   so that its tradition and its fame
   could never vanish or be destroyed.”
   209, 210. The pey from the Himalayas finished saying,
   “When Karikālan finished writing,
   he said, ‘If anyone reads this history
   all his wrong deeds will be forgiven.’”
   The Anangu heard the lineage of
   our king Abhayan, the son of the goddess of earth
   and said to the Himalayan pey,
   “You are wise to remember this whole history
   and tell it to us.
   I am happier now than when I gave
   birth to my son Abhayan.”
   211. The Anangu, the protector of all the peys
   and of the fame of the king Jayadungan,
   the ruler of all the world under his one royal umbrella,
   said, “The king will certainly protect this earth.”
   -----------

                                   PART 5
   Chapter 9. Pey muraippādu. The complaints of the peys (poems 212-231)

   The servants peys complain to the goddess that they are hungry and the
   goddess tells them
   that there will be a war and they will get plenty of food. They are
   pleased.
   The servant peys complain:
   212. The servant peys of the goddess complained,
   “O compassionate goddess, beloved of Shiva
   in whose divine matted hair the Ganges flows!
   We were not born as the fortunate Bhudams
   protected by king Abhayan,
   but we were born as peys to suffer.
   213. “Who can protect us unless
   you hear our troubles and show us your grace?
   We do not need a body if our lives
   are going to disappear,
   just as there is no need for a fort
   to protect a city that is already destroyed.
   214. “We are so exhausted
   that we do not have the strength any more
   even to get more tired.
   We grow thinner day after day
   and grow continually weaker.
   We could not stand against any enemy
   and we could not escape from them.
   215. “We are like dried wood fit only for burning.
   Our bodies grow emaciated
   and we have no way to be healthy.
   We are so hungry that we want to die,
   but you make it hard for us even do that.
   216. “Even dying is hard for us.
   Did we commit many sins in our last births?
   Is that why the four-headed god Brahma
   put hunger in our stomachs?
   We are sinners, there is nothing for us to eat.
   217. “We are so thin that the wind blows us like chaff and we cannot
   stay in one place.
   We are so hungry that we have eaten
   half of our tongues and lips.
   Now we have only half of our mouths.
   We are your slaves.
   Show us your grace and save us.
   218. “If the other kings give him tribute
   our king Ahalangan gives his grace to them,
   but he shows no compassion to us.
   His elephants stay in their sheds
   and rest without going to fight
   and so we cannot get our food from the battlefields.
   See, we your slaves are very hungry,
   growing thin and exhausted.
   219. “Our noses smell fat, our lips throb,
   a1d our mouths feel the taste of meat
   as flies buzz around us.
   We are alive only because we see these good omens
   that show us that good things are coming,
   otherwise we would die today.”
   220. The servant peys breathed hard
   and complained loudly.
   The pey from the Himalayas
   heard the complaints of the other peys
   and approached the goddess.
   221. He worshipped the goddess
   folding his hands and said.
   “Listen, Goddess!
   Hear the omens that occurred
   when I was in the northern Kalinga country.
   222. “The male elephants broke their tusks
   and their ichor dried up,
   and the female elephants grew tusks,
   and their ichor increased.
   The bright lamps became dark
   and the clouds poured red blood as rain.
   223. “The drums tied with thongs around them,
   played without drummers.
   The rainbow, the bow of Indra, arose in the sky at night.
   Owls hooted in all the houses in the city.
   Foxes howled in the forests
   and the smell of the burning sacrificial fire
   spread like fire on the burning ground.
   224. “Fragrant garlands stank of flesh,
   Golden chains studded with diamonds lost their brightness.
   Pictures of people on paintings dripped sweat
   and water that came from springs smelled with blood.”
   225. After saying this,
   the pey from the Himalayas asked the Anangu,
   “What do all these omens mean? Tell us.”
   And the Anangu told the peys
   what the omens mean.
   226. The Anangu said, “The omens that you saw
   in the northern Kalinga country
   will mean good fortune for you and the peys
   because there will be a war.
   Now I will tell you
   the meaning of our astrologer pey’s words
   and of his dreams.
   227. “The astrologer pey said that
   the elephants of the king Ahalangan
   the conquerer of the armies of his enemy kings,
   stand tied in chains and are ready to go to war,
   and therefore there will be a Parani.”
   228. The peys felt joy and said, “We will be fat.
   We can eat the heads of the warriors!”
   They danced until they were exhausted.
   They ground their teeth and wet their lips
   as if they were tasting meat.
   229. The peys said to one another,
   “Do not worry about hunger, do not worry about hunger.
   We will have food!”
   They laughed and laughed,
   until their chest bones were about to break
   and in their joy they forget their terrible hunger.
   230. The peys shouted and danced
   until they were exhausted.
   They asked the Anangu,
   “If we all get together,
   and eat the porridge of the Kalinga war,
   will there be enough food
   for our cage-like stomachs?”
   231. The Anangu replied, “Don’t fight among yourselves
   about whether there will be enough food for you.
   The Kalinga war is twice as big
   as the war in Lanka that is surrounded by the ocean.”
   ----------

  Chapter 10. Avathāram Prince Kulothungan’s Birth and Youth (Poems 232-
                                   311 ).

   The goddess tells the peys of the birth and the youth of prince
   Abhayan. At the end of the chapter
   a pey from the Kalinga country comes and tells them about the Kalinga
   war.
   Narrators: Anangu and the Kalinga pey.
   232. The goddess said,
   "Our king fought in Lanka and destroyed it
   and he also defeated all his enemies in the Bharatha war
   and conquered all lands.
   He was born as king Vijayadharan
   and carried a shining wheel
   to rule all the lands. Listen to what I say.
   233. “Once when the gods were in trouble,
   they went to Vishnu and asked him for help.
   Vishnu was born to Vasudeva and Devaki
   and all the three worlds praised him.
   234. “Just like Vishnu, born on a banian leaf,
   the Chola baby prince was born from the auspicious womb of Ammangai,
   the daughter of Rajendra Chola,
   the king of the sun dynasty that conquers its enemies,
   and the queen of Rājarāja Narendra,
   the king of the moon dynasty that takes away the darkness.
   235. “When the baby was born,
   the thunthumi drums sounded loud from the sky,
   They proclaimed, ‘The earth will become heaven
   and the Vedas will be recited always.’
   236. “When the baby prince was born
   rain fell like showers of flowers.
   The Chola queen, wife of Gangai konda Cholan,
   took her grandson, her daughter’s son,
   in her royal golden lotus-hands.
   237. “When the Chola queen saw
   the marks on her grandson’s body
   that indicated that he would protect the earth,
   she knew that he would become
   the heir of the sun dynasty and rule the Chola kingdom.
   238. “The kings of the lunar dynasty said,
   ‘This great one, the young child
   was born in our dynasty to brighten it.’
   The kings of the solar dynasty said,
   ‘This great one will be the emperor of our dynasty.’
   They both rejoiced thinking
   it was the result of their tapas
   that they were given a wonderful child.
   239. “The royal family thought
   ‘This child is the god Vishnu himself, born to Vasudeva,
   and he will take away the troubles of the earth goddess.”
   They made an auspicious aimpadaithali chain
   with five pendants in the form
   of a bow, a conch, a sword, a wheel and a mace,
   put that chain on him and rejoiced.
   240. “The prince was like a tiger cub
   raised by an angry father.
   He was like a matchless elephant cub
   embraced by the elephants of the eight directions.
   As he began to walk
   all virtuous and heroic deeds followed him
   as if they too were learning to walk.
   241. “From the time the prince drank milk
   from his mother’s breast,
   he showed his grace to the world.
   Even when he prattled, he sounded as if he were reciting
   the words of the Vedas and Manu.
   His words were clear and all
   understood them as his commands.
   242. “The prince wore a sacred thread on his chest
   that shines like the divine wedding chain
   on the beautiful neck of Lakshmi
   seated on a lotus on Vishnu’s chest.
   He had his second birth
   and wore that shining thread on his strong chest.
   243. “The prince learned all the Vedas of Vishnu
   from sages again and again
   just as they were given to the king Mabali
   when Vishnu came in the form of a Brahmin dwarf
   and took over the earth and the sky.
   244. “The prince carried the goddess of heroism of the Vindhya mountain
   on his arms
   and tied his shining sword on his majestic waist.
   When the earth goddess saw this
   she knew that her life would soon flourish.
   245. “As the prince learned to ride an elephant,
   he claimed that just as Indra conquered all his enemies
   riding on Iravadam, his four-tusked elephant,
   he would conquer his enemies
   riding on an elephant that has only two tusks.
   246. “As the prince learned to ride a horse, he thought,
   ‘The Sun god goes around the earth removing darkness
   and riding on his seven horses every day
   but I will ride on my one strong horse
   and remove the afflictions of the earth.’
   247. “As the prince learned to use the five weapons—
   wheel, conch, club, bow and sword—
   that he kept from the time he was born,
   he thought, ‘I will go around the world
   with my weapons in all directions and conquer the kings.’
   And even though he learned to use them skillfully,
   he was so strong that his flower-like hands did not suffer.
   248. “It is not enough to say
   that the prince had learned many arts.
   No, the only way to do justice to his talents
   is to say no other prince knows as many arts as he
   and there are no excellent arts on this earth
   that he did not learn.
   249. “After the famous king Veerarajendra Cholan
   had raised the tiger banner high
   and made Abhayan the prince,
   Abhayan decided to travel in all directions
   to fight with kings and take their lands.
   250. “He attacked his enemies
   and conquered them with all his weapons
   like a lion cub that attacks a rutting elephant,
   scoring its face with its sharp claws.
   251. “Just like the sun that rides on his chariot
   yoked with horses that rises in the east
   and removes darkness,
   the Chola prince went to the northern lands
   riding on his horse and conquered heroic kings.
   252. “The prince rode on his elephant
   as large as a mountain,
   fought with his enemies and conquered them
   in the city of Vairaharam where the battlefield burned,
   filled with smoke,
   like the three flying forts burnt by Shiva.
   The enemy kings folded their hands
   and bowed to the prince in the battlefield.
   253. “The prince killed the horses of his enemies
   that were sent by them like a roaring ocean
   and when enemy warriors came to fight with him
   making an oath that they would prevail,
   he piled their heads as high as a hill.
   254. “The Chola prince
   removed the evils of his land.
   He bent his bow-like eyebrows in anger
   and fought in Chakkarakottam
   the battlefield looked like the fort of Yama.
   255. “In each land where the prince fought and conquered,
   the goddess of victory belonged to him
   and the enemy kings gave him horses, elephants
   and wealth as tribute for his victory.
   256. “On the battlefield where the prince fought,
   he conquered his enemies so quickly
   that the eyes of the enemy kings did not become red
   and the legs of the retreating kings did not become red.
   Only his spear became red,
   and his fame spread everywhere.
   257. “When the matchless prince Abhayan
   went to the northern land riding on his horse to fight,
   the king of kings Veerarajendran died
   and went to world of the gods as their king.
   The prince returned to his country in the south
   and now I (Anangu) will tell what happened.
   258-260. “When the Chola country lost their king Veerarajendran,
   the country became disorderly.
   The Brahmins did not perform their sacrifices.
   The laws of Manu were not followed.
   The six paths of the shastras—
   astrology, literature, grammar,
   the yugas, dance and the arts and prosody—
   all were abandoned.
   The recitation of the Vedas was not heard.
   Castes did not follow their rules.
   People did not follow moral paths and fought always.
   Pujas at the temple were not done regularly.
   The women were not faithful.
   All order in the country vanished.
   261. “When the darkness of famine spread
   everywhere in the Chola country,
   the prince returned to the south
   to protect that land
   like the bright sun that rises
   from the roaring ocean.
   262. “The prince took over the Chola land,
   protected it and made it flourish,
   bringing the country back to an orderly state.
   263. “As sages bathed the prince in holy water
   from all the four oceans,
   the four Vedas and the three worlds,
   praised him.
   264. “As sages crowned the prince,
   many kings, wearing sounding anklets on their feet,
   threw arugam grass on his head and praised him.
   From then on the good laws of Manu
   were followed everywhere.
   265. “When the sages crowned the prince
   with a shining crown studded with precious jewels
   according to tradition,
   crops flourished in the country
   and all its citizens performed their duties well.
   266. “When our king raised his tiger banner
   and claimed that the Chola country
   belonged only to him and no one else,
   the Chola citizens celebrated festivals for the gods
   and raised the tiger flag in all the temples.
   267. The royal umbrella of the Chola king,
   studded with pearls, spread bright light like the moon,
   and removed poverty everywhere.
   Many kings folding their hands stood around our king
   wearing sounding anklets on their feet.
   268. “When the prince became our king,
   the hills in the Chola land
   shone like the Himalayas where Shiva stays
   and his royal white umbrella
   protected the people, providing them cool shade.
   269. “When the prince became our king,
   all troubles and poverty left the Chola land
   and his fame spread like the milky ocean
   where Vishnu sleeps.
   270. “When the prince became our king,
   people everywhere flourished
   and followed the Vedas.
   The Chera kings worshiped the feet of our king,
   and the Pandiyan kings ran
   and hid on islands in the ocean.
   271. “When the prince became our king,
   his hands graciously poured out wealth
   like rain to sages reciting mantras with sacrificial fire,
   that brought abundant rain everywhere.
   272. “When the prince became our king,
   poets carried the wealth that he presented to them,
   bulls carried the tribute that enemy kings gave
   and his feet were surrounded with gifts
   that friendly kings gave,
   while his shoulders carried the burden of the world.
   273. “After the prince became our king,
   only his cendu weapon bent
   when he fought with the kings of Himalayas.
   He planted the Chola banner of a tiger
   with shining fire-like eyes and sharp claws,
   and his royal scepter that gives justice never bent.
   274. “In the Chola kingdom,
   no chains that took away people’s liberty
   were found except for two—
   the chains on the feet of enemy kings
   in the war and did not obey him
   and the chain of sound that adorns Tamil poems.
   275. “The Chola country became peaceful
   and there was no sound of suffering or enmity.
   The only sound to be heard
   was the sweet sound of anklets on the lovely feet
   of beautiful women as beautiful as peacocks.
   276. “Since there were no wars in his rule,
   the only conflicts that the Chola king enjoyed
   were boxing, debates between scholarly poets,
   cock fights and the battle between elephants
   that dripped ichor.
   277. “The Chola monarch spent his time enjoying the arts,
   listening to poetry and music,
   and loving his beloved queens.
   He followed the rules of Manu
   and learned the Vedas to rule his country with justice.
   The king goes hunting
   The goddess continues to narrate
   278. “Once when the king was hunting
   on the banks of the Kaveri river
   that nurtures all the cool groves with its water,
   the emperor said, ‘I wish to go to the banks of Pālāru
   and hunt, riding on my horse.’
   279. “The king ordered,
   ‘Beat the drums and announce to all to come to Pālāru.’
   Hearing the announcement,
   a four-fold army gathered from all four directions.
   It was as if the whole world had entered into one city,
   as the sound of that army subdued
   the roaring sound of the waves of the ocean.
   280. “The astrologers chose an auspicious day
   and a faultless time for the hunt to go to Pālāru.
   The handsome king wore precious ornaments
   that made him even more handsome
   and readied himself to go for hunting
   on that auspicious day.
   281. “When the king set out for hunting,
   he gave gifts to the sages reciting the Vedas,
   gold to poets, and refuge to kings needing his help.
   His elephants were so happy to leave their sheds
   and they shed ichor in their joy.
   282. “The king rode on his elephant that shed ichor.
   His victorious royal umbrella shone brightly
   like the sun rising on the eastern hills
   and making the brightness of the moon fade.
   The white chowries, fanned at his sides,
   looked like the moon spreading its light.
   283. “When the king set out,
   the loud sound of the Valampuri conches,
   the beautiful music of the Panilam conches
   and the loud music of the various instruments
   all sounded like the rainy season
   filled with roaring clouds.
   284. “The sounds of the praise of the friendly kings,
   and the divine sound of of theVedas recited by sages
   spread everywhere on the earth
   and made the people and the gods
   wonder which large ocean had made
   such a roaring sound.
   285. “Ezhisai Vallabi, the queen, a beautiful singer,
   sang the songs that the Chola king composed
   and made all the seven worlds happy
   with her sweet music
   as she rode with the king on the elephant.
   286. “Thyagavalli, the crown queen,
   decorated with golden ornaments
   and flower garlands rode with the king,
   and she was surrounded by queens of other kings
   who protected many countries.
   287. “Many beautiful girls decorated with bracelets
   came riding on the female elephants,
   and it looked as if female elephants
   were riding on female elephants.
   As the kings decorated with golden crowns
   came seated under their royal golden umbrellas
   it looked as if many small crowns
   were covered with large crowns.
   288. “As many kings rode on fighting elephants
   it looked as if elephants were riding on the elephants.
   Lines of warriors came with their shining weapons
   following each other
   looking like one army following another.
   289. “As lines of elephants walked
   carrying sounding drums
   it looked as if clouds were carrying roaring clouds.
   The clouds that moved above the raised flags
   looked like they were also flags.
   290. “Girls adorned with golden mekalai ornaments
   on their waists rode on chariots
   and looked like chariots riding on top of other chariots.
   As all the vehicles moved, the dust that rose above
   made it look as if the clouds of another sky
   was under the clouds in the sky.
   291. “The army of warriors rode
   on male and young female elephants
   looked like a roaring ocean.
   It was as if king Abhayan and his army were building
   the Sethubandanam bridge on the large ocean.
   292. “As palanquins studded with precious blue stones,
   were carried by warriors in procession
   and royal umbrellas decorated with pearls,
   were held by warriors,
   it looked like the floods of the Ganges and Jamuna rivers
   flowing with abundant water.
   293. “Thousands of flags with their emblems
   of fish, snakes, eagles, elephants, boar, lions, roosters,
   bows and plows were raised
   as the strong angry tiger flag of the Cholas
   shone in the center.
   294. “Beautiful women like blooming creepers
   with pretty thighs, necks, large round breasts,
   fish-like eyes, shining faces,
   and hair decorated with flowers
   walked softly, chattering sweetly
   and they resembled matchless peacocks
   decorated with lustrous diamond ornaments.
   295. “As the women walked surrounding our king,
   their lovely thighs were like banana trunks,
   their soft necks were like flourishing kamugu trees,
   their breasts were like round young green coconuts,
   their noses were like kumiz blossoms,
   their red mouths were like kumudam flowers,
   and their lovely eyes were like frolicing fish.
   296. Because the women whose words are
   as sweet as sugarcane juice
   and whose bellies looked like curving waves
   walked like swans surrounding the king,
   it looked as if our Chola king Jayadungan had created
   another Chola country flourishing with the Kaveri river
   with its waves, swans and sugarcane plants.
   297. “As many kings riding on their elephants
   followed our Chola king
   it looked as if the mountains of the Chera country
   had come with their kings
   to ask for refuge from the Chola king with a victorious spear.
   298. “The drops of ichor that dripped
   from the tusks of the mountain-like Chola elephants
   looked like the pearls that the breeze scooped
   and brought from the Pandyan country
   when the Pandyan kings
   ran away because they feared Abhayan.
   299. “Our king Abhayan went
   on pilgrimages from the south to the north
   worshipping and receiving the grace of Shiva
   the three-eyed god, the lord of silver mountain,
   the dancer in Thillai.
   Then he reached the great Thiruvadigai city.
   300. The king left Thiruvadigai,
   stopped in many places, enjoyed his journey
   and when he reached the city of Kanchi,
   filled with richness,
   many chieftains ruling
   under their moon-like bright royal umbrellas
   welcomed him and worshipped him.”
   301. Even before the goddess narrated
   and finished telling of king Abhayan
   as a baby, a prince and a king,
   a pey from the Kalinga war came there excited.
   Even though his legs pulled him back,
   the joy in his mind pushed him to the front.
   A pey saw the war in Kalilinga country came
   and told the other peys how much they can get to eat from
   the battlefield in the Kalinga country. (302-306)
   302. The Kalinga pey said,
   “Blood, blood, everywhere there was the blood
   of the Kalinga warriors.
   Let us go, let us go to the battlefield there.
   Your thin bodies will become fat.
   Your thin bodies will become fat.
   303. “Your empty stomachs will be fed.
   Come, Come, You will be happy.
   O group of peys, get up, get up!
   O group of peys, get up, get up!
   304. “Listen, you seem so pitiful!
   What can you do by staying here? You should be there.
   There, the eagles that have strong wings
   and the vultures have eaten and their stomach are full.
   305. “All your stomachs are not enough
   to eat all the food that is there.
   All the mouths that you have are not enough
   to eat all the food that is there.
   If you think you have enough teeth
   they are not enough either.
   Whatever it is let us go and eat what we can.
   306. “If you want to eat the flesh of the warriors
   piled up like a mountain
   and drink the blood that flows like a wave-filled ocean,
   you should pray to Brahma
   and ask him to make you very hungry.”
   307. When the peys heard
   what the Kalinga Pey said,
   they suddenly became fat and felt
   as if they had already eaten the meat of the corpses.
   They staggered and fell on the ground.
   308. They ran to the pey, telling about the war, ,
   and kissed its mouth.
   They said,“We should break the teeth of the pey
   that said we will not have any food and die.”
   309. When the peys began to dance
   the thunangai dance in their joy,
   they did not even notice that
   their babies fell from their waists.
   They ran, danced and sang the Vallai song
   and called all the other peys to come and join.
   310. They worshiped and praised the goddess, saying,
   “Hail to our goddess. She told us about the war.
   They embraced the pey that described the dream of the war to them.
   311. The goddess stopped the dance
   of the peys and called the pey
   that saw the battlefield in Parandalai city
   and said, “Describe the war as it happened.”
   ----------

           Chapter 11. Kālikku kūli Kūriyadu. (poems 312- 403)

   Kuli, a servant pey of the Anangu says that the reason for the war with
   Kalingam is Tribute.
   Karunaharan went to Kalinga country with the Chola army to fight with
   the Kalinga king, Anandavarman.
   What the Kalinga king said and the advice of Kalinga minister and the
   fear of Kalinga people
   are described in this chapter.
   (The Kuli pey that came from Kalinga country continues to describe how
   the other kings came to
   give tribute to the Chola king Abhayan when he was seated with his
   queens and other kings and
   how the Kalinga king did not send his tribute. It continues to describe
   how Karunagaran, the army chief,
   offered to lead the army to go and fight with the Kalinga king and how
   he and the Chola army
   started to go to the war to the Kalinga country.)
   Narrator: the servant pey Kuli that has returned from the Kalinga
   country after seeing the war.
   Chola king stays in Kanchi city
   312. A pey came from the Kalinga country and said,
   “Those who would describe the Kalinga war
   need thousands of tongues
   and those who wish to hear
   what had happened on the battlefield
   where thousands of elephants died,
   need thousands of ears.
   313. “ Even though it is not possible for one person to describe the
   war with one mouth,
   I am a small person and will tell what I know.
   O, goddess, show me your grace and listen.
   314. “ One day in the golden city of Kanchi
   the clouds poured rain
   for seven and a half nāzihai,
   showing generosity like the lotus hands
   of generous king Abhayan, the ruler of the whole world
   and gives abundant gold to all.
   315. The bright Sun with his thousand rays,
   saw the precious golden palace of the king
   in the southwest, where there was
   a beautiful chitra mandapam and wondered,
   “Is this a palace or is it really Meru mountain?”
   316. The white royal umbrella that gave shade
   and the pandal that was decorated with shining pearls,
   looked like the sky where the bright moon rises
   in the midst of the gleaming stars.
   317. The two royal whisks
   that were fanned at the sides
   of the moon-like royal umbrella
   looked like two waves from the divine milky ocean
   that had come to serve the Vishnu like king.
   318. Our king planted the tiger banner
   on the golden mountain.
   He came back seated on the royal throne
   and carrying the burden
   of the beautiful earth on his shoulders
   looked like a chief of lions seated on the throne.
   319. The goddess Parvathi rider on a lion,
   the beautiful goddess Lakshmi
   and Saraswathi, the goddess of the many arts,
   were all with the king, the matchless chief of the earth
   that Adisesha carries.
   320. Just as the goddess of victory
   and the beautiful goddess Lakshmi
   stayed on the king’s shoulders without leaving him,
   his two queens worshipped him
   and stayed on each side of him
   as the king gave wealth to poor,
   more than the karpaga tree that never stops giving.
   321. The king was surrounded
   by women as beautiful as apsarasas
   and they sing the four types of the famous ragas,
   dance skillfully and have acted in many dramas.
   322. People from the countries of Sudar and
   Magada
   and bards sang auspicious songs
   and praised the king, saying,
   “Your feet are like a pure golden crown
   and they protect the refuges, came to your country.
   323. Excellent musicians played
   the veena, the yāzh, the flute and drums
   and bowed at the king’s feet and said,
   “We studied carefully and found out
   how to compose a hundred types of music.
   Listen to them and give us your grace.
   324. “Even though the musicians,
   as they played in front of the king,
   made no mistakes in rhythm and pitch,
   the learned king found fault in their playing.
   Still he gave the bards gold and elephants
   for their excellent music
   325. The chieftains defeated by the Chola king
   came to his assembly on elephants
   and served him by carrying his golden umbrellas,
   and fanning him with white whisks.
   326. As the king of kings was seated on the throne
   like Indra the king of the gods,
   the queens of the southern Pandyan kings
   and queens of other kings
   served the Chola queens as their servants.
   327. “As the chieftains of the Chola country
   and the great kings of many other lands
   came and waited at the entrance
   of the Chola palace to see the king,
   Karunagara Thondaimān, the chieftain of
   the Vandai country and other excellent ministers
   worshipped the king’s feet
   and seated themselves around him.
   The Chola king receives tribute from kings
   328. At that time, the king’s messenger
   came, worshipped the king and said,
   “All the kings are waiting to give tribute to you.”
   and all the kings approached the Chola king
   to give him tribute.
   The kings, the chieftains and the royal people
   who stood around the king:
   329. The chieftains, royal people,
   the southern Pandyan kings, the Chera king,
   the Kuvagar the kings of kollam,
   the Sāvagar, Chethebar, Yādavar,
   Kannadar, Pallavar,
   Kaithavar, Kādavar, Kāribar and Kosalar
   330. And Gangar, Kārallar,
   Kavittar, Thumindar, Kadambar,
   Thulumbar, Vangar, Ilādar, Malādar,
   Virādar, Mayindar, Jayindar
   331. And Singalar, Vangalar, Segunar, Sevanar,
   Siyanar, Aiyanar, Konganar, Kulingar,
   Akathiyar, Kucharar, Kachiyar,
   332. And Vattavar, Mandirar, Māluvar,
   Māgadar, Machar, Milechar, Suthirar,
   Kuttar, Kudattar, Midakkar,
   Thurukkar, Kurukkar, Thurukkar and others.”
   333. Many kings bowed to the Chola king
   folding their hands, gave him
   large quantities of wealth, and said,
   “You granted us all cities
   and countries and we became kings.
   We have brought the wealth that you desired.”
   334. Then they said, “We brought you,
   golden ornaments, elephants,
   camels, things for decorations,
   ancient crowns
   and boxes to keep them all.
   335. “We have brought fresh pearls
   that were just born in the ocean
   and matchless golden chains
   studded with precious jewels
   and priceless necklaces.
   336. “We have brought you piles of lustrous jewels, piles of gold,
   emerald ornaments that shine night and day,
   and forehead ornaments for your queens.
   We have brought perfect cub elephants and bull elephants,
   and herbs that saves people’s lives.”
   337. Many other kings wants the
   the grace of our emperor said,
   “We give you hundreds of elephants to ride on.
   If there are any other kincould give even a little more than we do,
   we will match the gifts of those kings.”
   338. The Chola emperor said to the kings
   came with tributes and bowed to his feet,
   “O kings, do not be afraid, I will grant you refuge!”
   and then he asked his messenger,
   “Are there any other kings that did not give tribute?”
   339. The messenger said,
   “O king, all the kings brought their tribute
   and bowed to your feet
   except the king of the northern Kalinga country.
   For the last two times, Anandavanman
   has not brought any tribute.’
   340. All the kings in the assembly were terrified.
   They stood up, trembling, and thought,
   “What will happen now?”
   The emperor smiled with his beautiful coral-like mouth
   showing no anger on his face.
   No one could understand his thoughts.
   341. The emperor said,
   “Even though the king of the Kalinga country
   is not a great king,
   his country is protected by large mountains.
   Let our warriors go right away,
   vanquish their fort-like mountains
   and bring their elephants dripping with ichor
   that swarms with bees. Bring their king also.”
   342. When the emperor said this,
   the king of Vandai country, Karunakarathondaimān,
   the best of his dynasty praised in the sastras,
   worshiped the feet of the emperor and said,
   “I will destroy Ezhu Kalingam.”
   343. The heroic Thondaimān thought
   “I will go there and crush our enemies”
   and he asked the king, “Give me your permission.”
   The emperor raised the tiger banner
   and gave him his permission to go to war.
   The Chola army goes to war
   344. When they saw the Chola warriors
   gathering to go to war
   and looking like the flood
   that will come at the end of the earth,
   people said, “Will this army stir up the oceans
   and destroy them?
   Will it break all the hills?
   Will it break the neck of Adisesha,
   carrying the earth?”
   345. When the army started, conches were blown,
   drums were beaten, war drums sounded,
   wind instruments played loudly
   and the noise of these instruments deafened
   the elephants of all directions.
   346. The shade of the royal umbrellas,
   the air from the whisks,
   and the swaying of the tiger flags
   hid the bright light of the sun
   and spread darkness everywhere on the earth.
   347. The burning fire from the eyes of the angry warriors,
   the brightness of the their precious golden ornaments,
   and the sparks that came from their weapons
   dispersed the darkness and spread light.
   348. The people saw the army wondered and said,
   “Did all the hills of the world become elephants of the army?
   Did all the winds become its horses?
   Did all the clouds become its chariots?
   Did the wave-tossed ocean become its warriors?”
   349. People wondered,
   “Is it because the world is small
   that the army looks so huge?
   Or is the army so great that the world looks small?
   For the enemies of the Cholas,
   there is no place on earth to hide.
   The only place that they could go
   is the wide sky.”
   350. “The people on the earth
   and heavenly dwellers saw the warriors
   and worried that they were losing patience
   and could not wait for the war to begin.
   They thought, ‘If these warriors lose their patience,
   won’t they just go off
   and attack the lands on all directions?’
   351. The Chola elephants large as mountains,
   dripped ichor like an ocean.
   Their angry eyes poured fire like clouds
   flashing with the fire of lightning.
   They had long tusks like crescent moons
   to split the bodies of enemy elephants and horses.
   They trumpeted like roaring thunder with fire
   and like the sound that would occur at the end of the earth.
   352. The Chola horses kicked the crowns of enemy kings
   and crushed the pearls that spilled from them.
   As they galloped the dust from the ground
   rose to the sky and joined the clouds.
   As they moved, they sounded like thunder
   from the sky falling on the ocean.
   As they circled the roaring ocean swiftly they were like waves.
   353. As the Chola chariots rolled, their wheels
   broke the hard mounds on the ground
   and they looked like they were flying over the battlefield.
   They felt it would be a disgrace
   if enemy horses could overtake them,
   They were decorated with beautiful lotus buds and flowers chiseled on
   them.
   They rolled over the bloody water in the battlefield and they rolled so
   fast
   that it seemed they had made a vow to measure the world.
   354. The bodies of the warriors were painted
   with their victories and duties
   and marked by the wounds
   that they had received in the battle.
   They would not retreat from the battlefield
   even if they could get heaven and earth.
   The heroic warriors thought their bodies were a burden.
   Even if they needed to give their life for fame,
   they would give them surely.
   All the warriors crowded together
   marched and thought the same way.
   355. The warriors with fiery eyes laughed angrily
   and the gods heard that and trembled.
   Hearing their laughter
   the elephants of all the directions were terrified.
   356. The spittle that came from the horses’ mouths
   when they jumped to the sky
   looked like the flood that arises at the end of the earth
   and it was like the waves that float on a divine river.
   357. The angry elephants
   dripping ichor from both their cheeks,
   trumpeted like thunder,
   broke the stakes they were tied to
   and ran to fight their enemies.
   The clouds that came down
   to take water from the wave-tossed ocean were terrified
   and rose again into the sky
   when they heard the sound of the elephants.
   358. The bees that swarmed everywhere
   around the ichor of the elephants
   were frightened and flew away
   when they heard the loud noise of the chariots
   that could circle the earth in a moment,
   decorated with flags that swayed in the wind.
   359. When the army set forth, the weight of it
   broke the spine of the earth.
   The hills and the trees of the forest
   fell down and the rivers dried up without water.
   360. When the army set forth, all the directions trembled
   and all the seven oceans became silent.
   Strong mountains split apart and thick dust spread everywhere.
   361. When the army set forth,
   the dust that rose from the earth
   split the clouds in the sky, filled them,
   took their water away, and made them dry up.
   362. The spittle from the mouths of the horses
   and the rain-like ichor from the decorated elephants
   as large as mountains stopped the dust that rose
   and made it settle to the earth.
   363. When the sun rose in the morning
   the ocean-like army set out in the appointed direction
   and as the warriors walked, the dust settled.
   Then when the sun set, they slept for the night.
   Every day they repeated this routine.
   364. The king Abhayan decorated with an Atti garland ordered
   Karunaharan to invade
   the Kalinga country, and Karunaharan, as precious to the king as his
   own eyes,
   climbed on an elephant and set out to war.
   To the king he was as precious as the discus to Vishnu.
   365. Karunaharan, the generous one,
   the chief of Thondai country,
   the chief of Vandaiyars and the Pallavas,
   raised his white bull-banner to the shining sky
   and mounted on his strong elephant to go to war.
   366. The chieftain Vānakovaraiyan rode his horse
   to seize the elephants of the enemy kings,
   and the Chola chief Mudikondacholan mounted
   on a strong ornamented elephant and followed him.
   367. Obeying the Chola king’s orders
   and wishing to conquer enemies,
   Karunagaran, the king of the Pallava and Vandai lands,
   mounted his elephant
   that was decorated with shining ornaments
   and had a stately walk.
   As he went to the war he was like a hungry tiger
   going to kill its prey.
   368. Karunaharan’s army crossed
   the six rivers Pālaru, Kusaittalai, Ponmukari,
   Pazavāru, Kolli, and the beautiful Pennai river
   and continued on.
   369. The army crossed the Vayalāru,
   the beautiful Mannāru, Peyalāru
   that waters so many fields,
   the fertile Kundri that gives water like rain
   and the wide Perāru
   that flows through many lands.
   370. The army crossed
   the great Godāvari river, the cool Pampa river,
   the Gayathri river that sings as it flows,
   the Gauthami river and many other rivers with cool banks,
   filled with pure water.
   371. As it entered the Kalinga country
   the army was like an ocean
   that rises at the end of the earth.
   It burned and destroyed many cities
   and plundered the wealth of the country.
   When they saw the destruction of Kalinga country,
   even the gods trembled.
   Description of the fear of the Kalinga people, the anger of
   Anandavarman, the Kalinga king
   and the advice of Engarayan, his minister. The Kalinga warriors go to
   war. (372 - 403)
   372. The people of the Kalinga country
   were terrified and complained to the king.
   They said, “The Chola army like an ocean
   has come from the south.
   If the ocean rises, where can we go?
   In the north there is Ganges river, hard to cross.
   Where is our refuge? Where is our protection?
   Which other king can help us now except our king?
   373. “The walls of our fort are broken.
   All our cities are burning.
   Smoke is rising above our cities.
   All our groves are dying. Our families are destroyed.
   Now the only thing that we can see
   is the enemy army that surrounds us.
   374. “O king, even though we told you, you did not listen
   and did not give tribute to the heroic Abhayan,
   the matchless king on the earth.
   Now he has sent his army to make you
   pay him the tribute he asked.”
   375. The people trembled,
   talking incoherently before the king.
   Their clothes became loose in fear
   and they fell at the feet of their protector.
   376. When Anandavanman the king of the Kalinga country
   heard his people his eyes reddened with anger.
   He sighed, sweated, and clapped his hands in rage.
   He did not realize the danger the war posed for his country.
   377. Anandavanman spoke to his people,
   “You worry about king Abhayan,
   seated under his beautiful royal umbrella
   and riding an elephant whose ichor is drunk by bees.
   Do you think I am so weak that I cannot oppose his army?’
   Angrily, the king of Kalinga
   shook his wide shoulders and laughed loudly.”
   He said,
   378. “Our Kalinga land is surrounded
   and protected by forests, hills and oceans.
   It seems the Chola army is ignorant of the strong defenses of our
   land.”
   The advice of the minister Engarayan advice to the Kalinga king.
   379. When the king Anandavanman had said this,
   his minister, Engarāyan, the minister said,
   “Listen, I have something to say to you.
   380. “Even if it makes a king angry,
   it is the duty of a minister to advise him properly.
   He must not be silent and not tell
   the king what is right.
   381. “It is not necessary for Jayadharan, the Chola king,
   to come to fight with his enemies himself,
   because his heroic army is enough to oppose
   and conquer his enemies’ lands.
   382. “Haven’t you heard
   that when the Chola army came to fight
   with the five Pandyans,
   they were all destroyed?
   383. “Haven’t you heard
   that when the Chola king’s army
   was only preparing to go fight with the Cheras,
   the Chera army retreated and ran away?
   384. “Didn’t the Chola army destroy Vizinyam city
   and conquer Kandalur Sālai because it is so strong?
   385. “Isn’t true that the king of the Vattar country
   was defeated when he came with his army
   and opposed the Chola army?
   386. “O, king, don’t you know
   how much the people suffered
   when the Chola king’s army massed,
   went and fought in the city of Alathi?
   387. “Didn’t the captains of the Chola army
   capture a thousand elephants
   when they fought in the city of Navilai?
   388. “How can I count the kings
   who suffered and lost their kingdoms
   when the Chola army
   fought and conquered them?
   389. “Karunaharan is like Vishnu’s discus
   for the king, strong as Vishnu,
   has come with his army.
   If you go and fight with Karunaharan
   you will discover how weak your arms are.
   390. “Though you are angry with me today,
   you will think of my advice
   when you stand before the Chola army
   on the battlefield.”
   The Kalinga King Anandavarman tells Engarayan.
   391. Upon hearing Engarayan’s advice
   King Anandavanman said angrily,
   “Even the gods tremble to speak in front of me.
   Haven’t you noticed
   that my arms, strong as mountains, are growing thin
   because for so long there has been no war?
   392. “You have advised me
   because that is your duty as a minister.
   I will not hurt you,
   but are you giving me advice only to make me weak?
   Does a young lion cub that lives in a cave
   come to fight with an elephant
   because he thinks it is easy?
   393. “You and other royal people
   do not know my strength,
   yet you have advised me without understanding
   the strength of my arms and sword.
   Do you say this because you are ignorant?
   Do you think it is easy for the Chola army to defeat me
   just because they think it is easy?
   394. “I will go to the battlefield with our armies
   of elephants, horses, chariots and strong warriors,
   stand before the army sent by the Chola king Kuladungan
   and oppose it. O, courageous warriors!
   Decorate our strong elephants and horses
   and ornament our numerous chariots.
   Let us go to the battlefield! On to the battlefield!
   You should realize that it is your good fortune
   that you can fight with your enemies.
   On to the battlefield!”
   The Kalinga army goes to war.
   395. When the army started,
   the sound of it echoed
   through all seven parts of the Kalinga country.
   It was as if the sound of the seven oceans
   in all the directions were combined together.
   396. The long-tusked elephants, as large as mountains,
   went dripping ichor and they were like the clouds
   that take water from the deep oceans
   and then pour rain. The long-faced horses
   galloped dripping spittle from their mouths
   that was like the rolling waves of the ocean.
   397. As the Kalinga army started to move like an ocean,
   its decorated royal umbrellas and royal fans
   looked like the foam of the ocean’s waves
   and as they swayed, the many royal banners
   looked like shining fish frolicking in it.
   398. The angry army looked like an ocean
   that was going to swallow
   the whole earth at the end of the world.
   As the army moved, the spears, swords and other weapons
   made a tumult as they crashed together.
   399. As the chariots rolled swiftly yoked to galloping horses,
   they looked like ships speeding as they float on the ocean.
   The young warriors,
   not caring for death if they could receive fame,
   marched like the killing sharks in the ocean.
   400. When the warriors marched,
   the trees immediately cracked and fell,
   the forest trees on the way split into pieces,
   the cool waterfalls grew hot
   and the large mountains were destroyed and shattered.
   401. When the young Kalinga warriors,
   their anger like the fire at the end of the earth,
   marched wearing heroic anklets,
   many drums resounded sounding like the large roaring ocean.
   402. People could not tell one warrior from the next
   because they marched so close to each other
   and it was as if each body had entered into the next one
   and there were no space between them.
   403. A huge throng of Kalinga warriors,
   come to oppose the army of the Chola king Manubaran,
   covered the battlefield
   looking like tigers searching for food.
   They screamed, “Let us take the lives of our enemies,
   Let us take their lives!”
   ---------

       Chapter 12. Por Padiyadu. The song of the War. (Poems 404- 471)

   The pey that came from the Kalinga country continued describing the war
   in Kalinga country.
   This chapter describes the fight between the Chola and Kalinga warriors
   and the appearance
   of the battlefield.
   The armies oppose each other on the battlefield
   404. Both armies, shouting louder than the ocean,
   said, “Let us start fighting, let us start fighting.
   Warriors on horses, forward!
   Warriors on elephants, forward!”
   The sound of the armies grew louder and louder.
   405. The people of the earth were deafened
   by the loud noise that the warriors made on the battlefield.
   They were terrified when they saw
   the arrows issuing swiftly from the archers’ bows
   and splitting things everywhere.
   406. As they fought with each other, the armies
   looked like two oceans crashing together,
   and the horses on each side
   looked like rolling waves opposing each other.
   407. The rutting elephants that fought
   looked like large hills fighting with each other
   and the chariots that clashed
   looked like clouds opposing each other.
   408. The warriors fighting
   looked like tigers.
   The kings opposing each other looked like battling lions.
   409. The warriors’ fire-like eyes streamed anger
   like the flashing of lightning
   and their bent bows sounded like thunder
   and the arrows that issued from them
   looked like pouring rain.
   410. The blood flowing on the battlefield
   was like a red river in flood,
   the white royal umbrellas that floated on the blood
   were like foam of the river,
   and the bodies of the elephants that were cut down
   and piled up were like the banks on both sides
   of that bloody river.
   411. The tusks of the mountainous elephants
   clashed with each other
   and the sparks of fire that rose from them
   burned the flags that flew above.
   412. As the flags burned,
   the smoke that rose from them
   seemed to make a line of flags across the sky,
   and this happened before anyone even realized
   there was a fire.
   413. Dark-colored ichor fell
   on both sides of the elephants
   and it blackened their tusks
   so they looked as if
   they had three black trunks.
   414. As they fought, the elephants,
   strong and large as mountains,
   pulled each other’s trunks.
   It looked like as if a rope
   was tangled between their tusks
   as they tried to pull.
   415. The mass of horses on the battlefield,
   their strength so great
   that they could destroy the enemy army,
   looked like the coral-colored fire at the end of the earth
   as it rages in the strong wind and burns the whole world.
   416. Some warriors did not wish to oppose the horses
   that came to fight in front of them.
   They stood in front of the elephants
   and fought with them
   and they felt as if they were embracing
   their beloved women decorated with pearls.
   417. When some warriors fought
   with elephants and broke their tusks,
   the scars that the tusks made on their chests
   looked like marks from the breasts
   of the goddess of victory, smeared with sandal paste.
   418. When some warriors riding on their horses
   fought with elephants and killed them,
   the precious pearls that fell from the elephants’ tusks
   could be strung as a pearl chain
   to decorate the goddess of victory’s breasts
   smeared with sandal paste.
   419. The battlefield where the warriors were arrayed
   and fought
   looked like an ocean with its waves.
   The matchless arrows that they shot
   started fires and made the battlefield look
   like a burning forest of bamboo.
   420. The arrows that the warriors shot
   struck one another and made fire and smoke.
   The sound as the arrows left their bows
   was like the crackle when a bamboo forest burns.
   421. As enemy archers shot their arrows,
   some opposing warriors riding towards them on horses
   swiftly cut them in half with swords,
   but even though the archers were killed,
   one part of them continued to shoot
   at the warriors on horses.
   422. Even though half of the bodies of archers
   was destroyed, the other halves continued to shoot arrows and
   they cut off the heads and legs of the warriors
   as they came to do battle on horses.
   People saw this, were amazed and exclaimed,
   “What great skill! What rare talent!”
   423. Even though their legs and heads were cut off,
   some warriors mounted on horses
   took in their hands the sharp, long arrows
   shot at them by the archers
   and shot them back and killed them.
   424. Some warriors shot their arrows only by guessing
   where their enemy warriors might be
   and split their bodies in two parts
   so that their pride would be destroyed.
   It was as if they shot their arrows
   just by guessing without knowing
   whether they were targeting the right thing.
   425. Some Chola warriors shot their arrows
   and the Kalinga warriors stopped them with their shields
   using them as barriers to protect themselves.
   426. When some warriors shot
   their unceasing stream of arrows,
   the enemy warriors blocked them with their shields
   and as they were pierced, the shields
   looked like walls with small holes.
   427. As the heroic warriors
   pierced their enemies’ bodies with their swords,
   those bodies with swords embedded in them
   looked like plows that split the earth.
   428. The trunks of elephants were cut off
   and fell, curling on the ground,
   and with sharp arrows piercing them,
   they looked like wheels with spokes.
   429. The pearls that fell
   from the heads of the strong elephants
   looked like the rice that manly grooms pour
   on the heads of their brides.
   430. The bodies of warriors lying on the ground
   with their fallen shields near them
   looked like axles and the wheels of a chariot
   fallen together.
   431. The discuses thrown by the enthusiastic warriors
   and the clubs that their enemies threw to stop them
   stuck together and looked like axes.
   432. The headless bodies of some warriors
   danced on the battlefield
   as a happy group of peys stood in front of them
   looking like dance masters
   standing in front of dancers and directing them.
   433. Some of the dead warriors’ camels, elephants
   and long-tailed horses would not leave the battlefield.
   They stayed there even after the war was over
   as if they wanted the war to start again.
   434. As trumpeting elephants were killed
   they fell into the river of blood and floated
   looking like clouds that come down
   to scoop up water from the roaring ocean.
   435. Some warriors cut off the trunks of elephants
   and, carrying them on their shoulders,
   looked like musicians playing wind instruments
   and supporting them with their shoulders.
   436. Some warriors in the war,
   lacking arrows to shoot at their enemies,
   pulled the arrows from their chests
   without hesitation and shot them back.
   437. Some warriors goaded their horses with their spears
   and then raised them, going around the battlefield
   and carrying them as if they were banners
   raised for the goddess of victory.
   438. Some warriors lost both of their legs
   and they threw one of their legs at the elephants
   that were charging and attacking them
   and kept their other leg to throw
   as a weapon when they needed it.
   439. Some of the warriors opposed,
   each other and killed with their swords.
   As both of them fell on the ground,
   warriors on both sides praised them noisily.
   440. Some warriors mounted their elephants
   and cut off the heads of their enemies,
   and the heads that fell on the ground shouted
   at the own elephants, “Attack our enemies!”
   441. Some warriors,
   wanting to fight the horses that came to attack them,
   did not have weapons of their own
   and pulled weapons from the dead elephants
   and threw them at the horses.
   442. Some warriors hit attacking elephants
   on their foreheads as the elephants tried to gore their chests.
   The warriors riding on the elephants shouted,
   “These are our own elephants!”
   and when they heard those shouts,
   the attacking warriors were ashamed
   and did not throw their weapons at the them.
   Karunagaran, the army chief, comes to the battlefield.
   443. Karunagaran, praised by the whole world,
   the chief of the land of the Vandaiyars
   and a minister of the Chola king,
   came to the battlefield to fight riding on his elephant
   that had one trunk and two tusks.
   444. Karunagaran’s army sent by the Chola king
   and the army of seven parts of the Kalinga country
   both arrayed themselves on the field
   and fought ferociously,
   wishing to conquer their enemies and get victory.
   445. The gods from heaven came to see that terrible war
   where both armies were arrayed and fought,
   rutting elephants were cut in pieces,
   and many horses were killed
   and many chariots were destroyed.
   446. The heads of the warriors
   whose bodies were cut in pieces
   were piled up like a mountain on the ground
   and their blood flowed like a roaring ocean
   and their intestines floated on the blood.
   447. Blood flowed in all directions like waves of the ocean
   as confusion spread on the battlefield
   where many chariots were destroyed.
   Eagles, foxes and crows ate the flesh
   of the elephants and horses
   that were killed in the battlefield.
   Anandavarman, the Kalinga king and his people, defeated, run and hide
   448. The king of the seven Kalinga lands,
   Anandavanman, who had said that he would come
   with a thousand strong mountain-like rutting elephants
   to oppose his enemies, could not prevail.?
   He lost his manliness and ran away to hide.
   449. Where did the Kalinga king hide?
   In the caves that only he knew?
   Under the earth where no one could find him?
   In thick forests?
   No one knew where he had hidden himself.
   450. The people from all seven parts of the Kalinga country
   saw the battle and scattered in fear.
   Terrified, they thought,
   “What is this? Is it a magic war?
   Is it fire? Is it the time when Yama comes?
   Is it end of the earth?”
   451. When the Kalinga warriors scattered,
   some jumped into the ocean,
   some hid behind angry elephants,
   some, searching for ways to escape, hid in caves,
   some hid in the bushes.
   They could not even follow one another.
   452. As they ran, some Kalinga warriors
   saw their own shadow
   and thought it was someone chasing them.
   Terrified, they bowed to their shadow, trembling,
   and said, “You are a Tamil, you are a Tamil,
   give me refuge, give me refuge!”
   453. The Kalinga warriors hid in dark caves and said,
   “The Chola elephants that the king Vanavan sent
   trumpet like thunder roaring in the clouds and fight angrily.
   We only saved ourselves today
   because we showed our backs and ran away!”
   454. When the matchless Karunagaran
   destroyed the Kalinga country, the enemy warriors ran away
   wearing just one piece of cloth around their waists.
   455. When the Kalinga warriors ran,
   the Chola warriors chased them angrily
   and took their elephants and horses.
   No one could count the elephants and horses
   that the Chola warriors took.
   456. No one could count the elephants
   that were wounded on the field
   and shed blood mixed with ichor
   that swarmed with bees and vultures.
   457. Many elephants went mad
   and threw their drivers.
   As they wandered around out of control,
   some warriors caught them and tied them up.
   458. The Chola warriors imprisoned many kings
   along with their elephants.
   They tied kings and elephants together so that
   they looked like tigers and mountains bound together.
   459. No one could count the strong galloping horses,
   the chariots, the camels, the nine types of precious stones,
   the women and all the wealth
   that the Chola warriors took from the battlefield.
   460. Karunagaran, the army chief of king Abhayan, said,
   “Let us take all the wealth with us
   along with the king of the seven parts of Kalinga country.
   Go, find out where the king of Kalinga
   has hidden himself.”
   461. As soon as the captain gave them these orders,
   an ocean of innumerable spies
   went immediately and searched for the Kalinga king
   in mountains, forests and thickets.
   462. Some warriors said, “We cannot find any hint
   of where the Kalinga king might be hidden
   and so we are continuing to search for him.
   We did see his strong army with their weapons
   on the top of a mountain,
   so numerous that no one could count them.”
   463. The Chola warriors thought, “No mountain peak,
   no ocean and no forests can protect the Kalinga warriors.”
   They sailed around the ocean, climbed mountains all day
   and in the evening, at sunset,
   they reached the top of a mountain.
   464. The Chola warriors, holding their bows and spears,
   stood around until dawn on the top of the mountain
   surrounding it like a fence.
   They looked like the men that guard boars
   that have been locked in a shed
   after being hunted down by king Abhayan,
   riding his elephant that never fails in his hunting.
   465. The people, seeing the mountain
   that was covered with the blood of enemies
   flowing like a river, exclaimed,
   “How could this mountain have become red like this?
   Is this the same mountain where the sun rises?”
   466. Many of the Kalinga warriors
   pulled out their hair and took off their clothes
   and,wearing only a small loincloth,
   told the Chola warriors, “We are Jains!”
   That is how they disgraced their country and escaped.
   467. Many Kalinga warriors
   took the strings from their bows and wore them like sacred threads.
   They lied to the Chola warriors and said,
   “We went to bathe in the Ganges
   but because of our fate you caught us. We are not hiding.”
   That is how they failed to attack their enemies and escaped.
   468. Many Kalinga warriors and others were bald,
   wore orange clothes, soaked in blood,
   and escaped by lying to the Chola warriors, saying,
   “Don’t you see that we are Buddhist monks
   wearing saffron robes?”
   469. When many Kalinga warriors and others
   were caught by the Chola warriors,
   they rang the bells of their elephants,
   sang and escaped, saying,
   “We are from the Telugu country.
   We saw this battlefield with so much death
   and were terrified.
   Don’t you see that we are Panars and your slaves?”
   470. The only Kalinga warriors to be seen were the paintings on the
   walls
   of warriors from the seven parts of the Kalinga country.
   The Chola warriors had searched out all their enemies,
   caught them and killed them. None could escape.
   471. The king of the Vandaiyar dynasty,
   Karunagaran from the Thondai country,
   conquered the Kalinga country that is surrounded by the sea
   and planted a pillar of victory there.
   He captured rutting elephants,
   strong horses and great wealth
   and gave them to king Abhayan with a bright sword.
   He bowed to the king and received his grace. (404 -471)
   -----------

     Chapter 13. Kalam padiyadu. The song of the battlefield (Poems 472-
                                    502)

   The author, goddess and peys describe the battlefield after the war.
   472. When they speak of great wars,
   men have always described the wars
   between Murugan and Surapadman in the Skandapurana,
   Rama and Ravana in the Ramayana,
   the Pandavas and Kauravas in the Mahabharatha,
   but the battle between Karunagaran and Anandavanman
   was so terrible that in the future men will forget those wars
   and remember only that Kalinga war.
   473. When one of the peys
   asked the goddess, “O goddess,
   the battlefield is the place of Yama.
   Come quickly and see it!”
   the goddess, the beloved of Siva,
   sweet as nectar to him whose neck is dark
   approached the battlefield with the peys.
   474. The goddess, decorated with precious jewels,
   went with the peys, saw the terrible battlefield,
   was amazed and told her group of Alahais.
   “What a terrible battlefield!”
   The goddess shows the battlefield to Alahais
   475. “See the bodies of the elephants
   covered with wounds
   floating on the river of blood one after another
   like ships that float one behind the other.
   See them, see them!
   476. “See those horses that are spread over the battlefield.
   They have fallen into the fat and cannot get up.
   The heavy saddles on their backs slip down
   and they look like pieces of wood joined together
   to dam the river of blood. See them, see them!
   477. “See the flocks of small birds
   and large vultures
   that eat the flesh of the warriors
   whose happy faces are like blooming lotuses,
   like those great ones who rejoice
   when they can feed equally the rich and poor.
   See those warriors, see those warriors!
   478. “See the troops of foxes
   staying by the warriors’ bodies
   and do not leave them until they die.
   They are like the poor
   who stay near miserly men hoping to get help from them
   but who get nothing even after those misers die.
   See those foxes, see those foxes!
   479. “See the bees that swarm around the strong elephants
   whose ichor pours out like rain
   and leave the elephants when their ichor stops.
   They fly to the flowers that are showered down by the gods
   for the victory of Karunagaran.
   These bees are like the women desiring wealth
   happy living with rich men
   but leaving them when they become poor.
   See those bees, see those bees!
   480. “See the elephants that fell and float
   on the river of blood on the battlefield.
   See how the flags of the kings have fallen
   on the elephants so they both float together
   as if the flags were chaste women who enter the fire with the bodies of
   their husbands.
   See that, see that!
   481. “See those women
   searching for the bodies of their husbands
   so that they could die with them
   and asked the guards of the goddess and the goddess’s Idahinis,
   ‘Where are the bodies of our husbands?”
   See them, see them!
   482. “See a wife suffering
   when she sees her husband lying
   with closed lips and asks him,
   ‘Were your lips wounded?
   Is that why they are closed?’
   Her life is slowly ebbing away.
   See that woman! See that woman!
   483. “See the woman giving up her life
   with her husband as she holds his body
   before the earth goddess and embraces him
   while the heavenly women welcome his soul.
   See that woman, see that woman!
   484. “See the woman asking the goddess Bhairavi,
   ‘Where is the sword
   that my husband had in his strong hands?
   Where is his beautiful chest?
   Where are his heroic shoulders
   that never retreat in war?’
   See that woman, see that woman!
   485. “See the blood that gushes from the warriors’ wounds
   as they ride on galloping horses and fight each other,
   see how it splashes and touches the sky
   and makes the dark clouds red.
   See that, see that!
   486. “See how the dark crows
   come to eat the white fat on the battlefield
   and, plunging into it, are covered and became white.
   No one has ever seen dark crows becoming white
   in this world. See that strange scene now!
   487. “See how the battlefield looks like a lotus pond
   as broken pieces from the decorations of the chariots
   are like lotus buds, the blood that flows is like water
   and the hair of warriors is like moss.
   See that lotus pond, see that lotus pond!
   488. “See the bodies of the warriors
   pierced by arrows and shining spears,
   see how they stand without falling to the earth
   so they look like the bamboo poles
   that stand upright as dancers walk across
   the tightrope tied between them.
   See those bodies, see those bodies!
   489. “See how the vultures
   suffer as they fly everywhere around the field,
   see how they have been wounded by the spears
   protruding from the bodies of the warriors
   as they ate their flesh.
   See those vultures, see those vultures!
   490. “The captains of the armies
   standing in the front fought fiercely
   and gave up their lives to protect
   other warriors standing behind them.
   See how they did their duty
   and thereby gave thanks to their king.
   491. “Some warriors,
   riding on the elephants against each other,
   cut off their enemies’ heads and threw them up in the air
   making them look like ammanai balls
   thrown by the goddess of victory as she plays.
   See those ammanai balls, see those ammanai balls!
   492. “Look at the warriors, impossible to count.
   They ride to heaven on chariots
   that descend from the sky to them.
   Will there ever be a larger crowd of warriors
   in the shining sky than these?
   See how they go to heaven,
   see how they go to heaven!
   493. “Look at the blood
   that pours from the warriors’ bodies
   mixed with the ichor of elephants
   and the spittle from the mouths of horses.
   It spreads like an ocean
   whose waves are white as a chowry.
   Look at that ocean of blood,
   look at that ocean of blood!
   494. “Jayadharan, the Chola king
   is like Rama who fought with the king of Lanka.
   See the corpses of the elephants
   piled up like mountains.
   They are like the stone bridge
   that was constructed by the monkeys for Rama.
   See those elephants, see those elephants!
   495. “See how the warriors put their hands up
   to stop the arrows of an excellent warrior, saying,
   ‘How did he learn to shoot like this?’
   as his arrows penetrate the shields and the armor
   that covers the chests of his enemies and kill them all.
   See those warriors! See those warriors.
   496. “See the souls of the warriors that go to heaven
   on sky chariots like gods
   and see the warriors lying on the battlefield
   looking like gods because their faces are joyful
   and their eyes do not blink.
   See those bodies, see those bodies!
   497. “Look at the the large elephants
   whose tusks are like crescent moons.
   See how they are cut in two and lie on the ground
   making the battlefield look
   like the shop of an blacksmith spread with tools.
   498. “See the warriors lying
   on the ground of the battlefield
   holding the spears that struck their chests
   so they look like musicians
   playing long wind instruments.
   See those warriors, see those warriors!
   499. “See the warriors on chariots
   taking in their hands the long spears
   that have pierced their chests.
   As they stand on their chariots
   they look like rowers with their oars
   as they sail on an ocean of blood.
   See those warriors, see those warriors!
   500. “See how an eagle that was flying in the wide sky
   was hit by an arrow and has fallen.
   It holds in its beak a large arrow
   as it floats in the river of blood and fat.
   See that eagle, see that eagle!
   501. “The bhudam with a large belly
   that ate the chief of all the armies
   and carries many horses on his head
   looks like an incomparable dark cloud as he walks
   and moves like a pregnant woman.
   See that bhudam, see that bhudam!
   502. “See the warriors
   riding on elephants as large as mountains.
   They were so worried that they might
   be wounded in their backs
   that they stood in front of their enemies,
   were hit in the chest and fell to the ground.
   See those warriors. See those warriors!”
   ------------

      Chapter 14. Kuzh aduthal. The song of cooking the porridge (Poems
                                  503-596 )

   503. The goddess showed her grace to the alahais and said,
   “I cannot show and tell everything
   that happened in the battlefield.
   The blood of the elephants combined with their ichor
   and flowed like a river whose flood is stopped by a dam.
   Now, you may all plunge into this river of blood,
   cook porridge and worship the gods.”
   The peys says,
   504. “O short modi,
   you wear a long garland made of fat,
   you plunge and play in the river of blood,
   you have sharp teeth,
   you are a tricky one,
   and you want to eat goats,
   You with a pot belly,
   come to make porridge,
   come to make porridge.
   505 “Break the white tusks of the elephant
   for brushing your teeth.
   Take the chest bone of dead elephants
   for cleaning your tongue.
   506. “Use sharp arrows to clean your fingernails.
   Take the ichor of the strong elephants
   and use it as oil to comb your hair.
   507. “Use white brains for shampoo
   to remove the oil from your hair.
   Join together, jump into the pool of blood,
   swim and play.
   508. “In the pool of blood
   there are rods, arrows and spears
   and many other weapons.
   Do not go into it and hurt yourselves.
   Stay near the bank and bathe.
   509. “Do not swim for a long time
   in the deep pool of blood.
   Come out and take the fat of the Kalinga warriors,
   make it into a garment and wear it.
   510. “Take the ornaments on the tusks
   of the rutting elephants
   and wear them on your wrists as bangles
   studded with precious jewels.
   Take the stirrups from the horses
   as they eat grass and wear them on your feet
   as golden anklets studded with pearls.
   511. “Take the hoops that the warriors
   have thrown in the terrible war,
   stretch them as large as you need,
   and make ear ornaments to decorate your ears.
   512. “Take the trunks of huge elephants
   that are as tall as palmyra trees
   and tie them on your hands
   as auspicious cords to protect you.
   Take two drums, put a long rod between them
   and wear them as an ear ring.
   513. “Take the saddles from the horses
   that fell to the earth and wear them as ornaments for your arms.
   Take the conches blown by the warriors,
   string them together and wear them as pearl necklaces.
   514. “Take the eyeballs of the angry warriors
   who fought and died in the war
   and the beautiful pearls
   fallen from the heads of elephants,
   string them together using nerves as threads
   and wear them as beautiful chains.
   515. “We could find many other things
   to wear as ornaments to adorn ourselves,
   but it is getting late. We will be hungry,
   our stomachs will hurt and we will be upset.
   Come let us cook the porridge and eat.
   516. “Let us make a pandal with the wings of strong vultures
   and the ears of elephants as large as mountains,
   and let us make a kitchen under the pandal
   and begin to cook.
   517. “Smear the floor
   with the ichor of rutting elephants,
   make kolams with a powder of pearls
   fallen from elephants’ heads
   and use the heads of the elephants
   that died in the war as stoves
   and start cooking.
   518. “Take the stomach of the elephants
   whose heads, legs and intestines
   have all been cut off in the battle
   by warriors with their victorious swords
   and use them as pots on the stoves to cook.
   519. “For cool white yogurt,
   mix together the brains of the warriors
   and for red yogurt use their flesh.
   Put them in all the pots on the stoves.
   520. “For water, pour the blood of the horses
   into the pots that were made
   of the stomachs of elephants
   killed in the war.
   521. “For garlic use the white teeth of the horses
   that fell on the field
   and for salt for the porridge
   add the nails of the warriors who died in battle.
   522. “Even though the warriors’ souls
   went to heaven in the sky, the fiery eyes of their bodies
   have not lost their fury and are still red.
   Use them as fire for the stoves.
   523. “Collect the weapons—
   spears, swords, arrows and sticks—
   use them for firewood
   and start the fire.
   524. “Use the teeth that were broken and fell out
   when the Kalinga warriors
   bit stones in the battle.
   Crush them and use them for rice
   when you cook.
   525. “First taste the rice-teeth
   you will use for the porridge
   and then use the drums
   that are broken and soundless
   as mortars to pound the rice.
   526. “Put the teeth-rice into the drums
   and use the tusks of the dead elephants
   for pestles to pound the rice
   singing, ‘chalukku, molukku.’
   527. “Sing the praise of the goddess Durga.
   She gave you corpses
   and took away your hunger
   and the weakness of your big bodies.
   Sing the praise of that great goddess as you pound the rice.
   528. “The heroic Chola king,
   rider on a galloping horse,
   rules the country where the Kaviri river flows.
   He bears the burden of his country on his two shoulders,
   relieving Adisesha of the burden of carrying the earth.
   Sing and praise our king and pound the rice.
   529. “Sing the praise of our king Abhayan.
   He holds a shining sword and fought in battles,
   conquered the Pandyan kings and defeated the Chera kings with his angry
   elephants.
   Praise our king and pound the rice.
   530. “Sing how the Chera kings,
   adorned with diamond-studded crowns,
   and the Pandyan kings,
   adorned with beautiful crowns,
   bow to the great feet of our king.
   Praise our king’s gentle feet and pound the rice.
   531. “Sing the praise of the elephants
   that have fragrant ichor
   and bring tribute from the northern kings
   to our king Abhayan with a long shining sword.
   532. “Sing the praise of our learned Chola king
   whose round umbrella covers all the lands surrounded by oceans
   and whose flower-like feet are bowed to by enemies.
   Sing the praise of the strength of the bows
   of our warriors and pound the rice.
   533. “Sing and praise of the victorious
   royal umbrella of our king
   that protects the earth goddess always and pleases her.
   Sing the happiness of the people
   on the day when our king was born.
   Sing the praise of Kulothunga Chola and pound the rice.
   534. “Sing and praise the prosperous cities of Vandai,
   ancient Mallai and excellent Kanji.
   Sing and praise Karunagaran,
   the great chieftain of the Pallava dynasty,
   and pound the rice.
   535. “Sing the praise of Karunagara Thondaimān,
   the chief of Thondai Nadu,
   the conquerer of the Kalinga country
   who captured an army of elephants.
   He is the cause for poets
   to praise our king, our protector,
   in a Parani poem.
   Sing and pound the rice.
   536. “Sing how hundred of thousands of chieftains
   decorated with shining crowns
   come at an auspicious time,
   bow and give tribute to our king
   and how the goddess with beautiful eyebrows
   gives her grace to all.
   Praise our king and the goddess and pound the rice.
   537. “Our excellent king Abhayan
   has only one crown, but the crowns of the kings
   who bow to his feet are hundreds of thousands.
   Sing the praise of our king and pound the rice.
   538. “The mountains where enemy kings ran
   and hid who do not pay tribute
   or bow to our king with their crowned heads
   are hundreds of thousands.
   Sing the praise of our king and pound the rice.
   539. “Hundreds of thousands of kings
   stand before the palace entrance of king Abhayan,
   defeated and suffer losing in the war with the Cholas.
   Sing and praise of our king and pound ice.
   539. “Hundreds of thousands of kings
   suffer standing before the palace entrance
   of the ministers of our king
   who wears garlands of victory.
   Sing and praise our king and pound rice.
   540. “The generous king Abhayan
   whose arms are adorned with garlands
   gives wealth to sages
   to perform hundreds of thousands of sacrifices
   so the earth may flourish with rain
   and those sacrifices never cease.
   Sing and praise our victorious king and pound the rice.
   541. “Adisesha’s thousand heads do not need
   to carry the burden of the earth anymore
   because the two shoulders of our king Abhayan
   bear the burden of the earth.
   Sing and praise our king and pound rice.
   542. “Like Vishnu, who gave nectar to protect the gods,
   our king with powerful arms gives grace
   to hundreds of thousands of people
   and his decorated royal umbrella covers all the lands,
   surrounded with oceans in all four directions.
   Sing and praise our king and pound rice.
   543. “Many kings bow before the feet of our king Jayathungan,
   who cut off thousands of arms of his enemies
   like the god Vishnu who cut the thousands of arms of Vānasuran.
   Sing and praise our king and pound rice.
   544. “Like Vishnu who went as a messenger,
   with his wheel and other weapons
   our king Abhayan with many elephants
   decorated with forehead ornaments
   carries many weapons and goes to war.
   Sing and praise our king and pound rice.
   545. “Sift the teeth-rice that you have pounded
   with the round sieve that is called “challa vattam’
   so that the husk will go away and become clean
   and make the rice soft.
   546. “Clean the floor with your hands.
   Use the beautiful quivers
   of the Kalinga warriors as measuring pots
   and measure the flour.
   547. “Since the gloves that the warriors wore
   are not large enough to use as measuring pots,
   use their quivers as measuring pots.
   Scoop the rice from the mortar
   and pour it in the cooking pots on the stoves.
   548. “Stir and cook the porridge
   so it doesn’t overflow
   using warriors hands and horses’ legs as spoons
   on Parani day on the battlefield.
   549. “Come, take a tiny bit of this porridge
   that is like a treasure for us
   on your palm and taste it to see if it has enough salt.
   550. “Lower the fire so that you will not be hurt.
   Use your stirring sticks and stir the pots well.
   Stir and stir to cook.
   551. “Touch the porridge to find out
   whether it is cooked and taste it.
   This porridge tastes much better
   than any we have tasted before.
   Come, let us take the pots from the stoves.
   552. “Don’t take the pots
   from the stoves with your hands
   because you will be burned and drop them.
   Use the meat of horses for cloths,
   catch the pots on both sides with your hands
   and bring them from the stoves slowly.
   553. “You are worried and say,
   ‘We cannot finish this porridge
   with just one mouth.”
   But do you really need thousands of mouths
   to eat this porridge?
   554. “When our tongues
   that have not tasted any food for a long time
   taste this porridge,
   won’t the porridge dry quickly like the water
   that is sprinkled on a burning rod?
   555. “We have not tasted porridge
   like this before in this world.
   Will there be any porridge left over after we have eaten?
   We know a way to save this porridge.
   556. “Take as much as blood you want
   for water from the river where hot blood flows
   and use the heads of the elephants for pots
   to scoop the blood and make it cool.
   557. “Sweep the floor
   with the tails of dead elephants
   using them as brooms
   and sprinkle the blood on the floor
   to make the floor clean so you can put the pots there.
   558. “Use the shields that kings used in the war as plates
   and use the skulls of the heads of the kings
   the rulers of the world as drinking cups.
   You will have many cups.
   559. “Use the golden shields
   of the Kalinga warriors who died in the war
   as golden serving dishes
   and use the royal white umbrellas that have fallen
   as shining silver pots.
   560. “Use the large legs of the long-trunked elephants
   as bowls to drink the porridge
   and keep the dishes always full
   so that you will get enough.
   561. “Use the anger that flares
   from the eyes of the warriors shouting in the battle as lamps.
   as lamps for those who received the grace of our Anangu
   and use the fat of the angry warriors as mats to eat on.
   562. “Arranging the plates
   according to the status of the peys,
   make them sit in lines with their friends
   and pour the porridge for them.
   Come to serve the porridge, come.
   563. “Use as serving spoons
   the heads of the enemy warriors
   that have been struck by spears in the battle
   and fallen outside of the forts of Gangapuri.
   564. “O great cooks,
   you have made porridge on Parani day in Manalur
   when the king fought with his enemies
   and you know how to cook and serve.
   Come and serve the porridge in lines.
   565. “Give porridge to the brahmin peys.
   When they see so much porridge,
   they open their mouths and beg continually,
   ‘bhavathi, pikshām dehi’.
   566. “Check that there is no hair in the porridge,
   rinse it with a cloth made of fat
   and serve the porridge to the Jain peys
   that have made a vow not to kill
   and eat only once a day.
   567. “Give the Buddhist peys
   who cover their whole bodies with a skin
   good-smelling porridge made of brains
   and let them fill themselves up to their necks
   and then babble with their tongues.
   Come and serve.
   568. “Even though the manager pey ate goat meat,
   it is not enough for him and he became thin.
   Make the porridge with various kinds of meat
   and give it to the manager pey.
   569. “Pour the porridge
   into the hands of the hungry blind pey
   that cannot find his eating dish
   because it was stolen
   and laments and searches for it with his hands.
   570. “Pour porridge into the hands of the dumb peys
   that point at the porridge with their hands
   and show their hunger with their sorrowful looks.
   571. “Give more porridge to the pregnant pey
   that tastes the porridge, licks her tongue,
   wipes the end of her mouth and says,
   ‘My ears were closed before because I was hungry,
   but now they have opened after I have tasted the porridge.’
   572. “Give porridge to that stupid pey
   that is shocked and does not know what to do
   when he sees his porridge pot is leaking.
   He turns it over thinking that it will not leak
   and spills it all.
   573. “Give porridge to the accounting pey
   that takes a part of the trunk of an elephant,
   bites it hard with his teeth and says,
   ‘Pour the porridge on the end of this trunk.’
   574. “Give more porridge to the dancer pey
   that takes a pot full of porridge, drinks it and says,
   ‘My husband will not drink porridge
   but I will drink his share too,’
   and she asks for more.
   575. “Give porridge to the guest peys
   that saw the war on Parani day once before
   and come now to drink porridge thinking
   that they will get porridge on this Parani day in this battle also.
   And do not forget the peys that live in our town.
   576. “Give porridge to the pey
   that saw a dream at night
   and told us that there will be a war.
   Fill a bowl made of horse skin with porridge
   and save it for that pey for tomorrow also.
   577. “Give a lot of porridge to the accountant pey
   that counted us and told how many of us need to be served
   because we are not smart enough to count
   how many of us there are to drink porridge.
   578. “Bite the soft white intestines.
   use the thin fingers as ginger,
   chew the bones of the palms
   and swallow the brains.
   579. “You all stay together.
   Use lotus buds for garlic, bite
   and scoop the hot porridge, blow and drink.
   580. “Ask Brahma to give you three mouths
   and show him how you could use all those mouths
   to happily drink the porridge.
   581. “Run, sweat and drink the porridge.
   Fly like bees, become tired and drink the porridge.
   Dance, move around and drink the porridge.
   Make sure you have digested the porridge
   you have drunk and then drink some more.
   582. “Take cool water in the skulls of the angry elephants
   that died from arrows in the war
   and use it to rinse your mouths
   after drinking the porridge.
   583. “Use the ears of the horses for betel leaves,
   their hooves for betel nuts,
   the white part of their eyes for lime,
   mix them all together and chew it as pan.
   584. “You have eaten too much
   and taken too much pan.
   O, intoxicated peys!
   How will you survive?
   Smell the hair on the heads of the bhudams
   and it will cure you if you have overeaten and gotten sick.”
   The joyful peys
   585. They were happy, they looked like large hills
   they bent down,
   they burped and got fat,
   they prayed to god
   and danced on the battlefield.
   586. The peys threw off their clothes, danced
   and praised the victory of the warriors of king Manadan.
   They sang how the Chola army routed the Kalinga warriors
   and how the Kalinga warriors left their horses and ran away.
   587. The peys danced swinging both their hands.
   They praised the victory of the Chola army
   sent by the king who gives joy to all people and protects them.
   They sang how the Chola army
   chased the Kalinga warriors from the battlefield.
   588. Some of the peys entered
   the stomach of the dead elephants,
   imitating the Pandiyan warriors
   who entered caves to hide.
   Some fell into the flood of blood,
   imitating the Chera warriors who fell into the sea
   carrying their banners marked with bows.
   589. Some of the peys fell and rolled on the floor
   like the weapons, swords and arrows
   that fell on the battlefield and rolled on it.
   Some of the peys ran retreating from the war
   with their hair loose, imitating the Kalinga warriors
   when they retreated from the war with their hair undone.
   590.The peys sang the victory of our king,
   the conquerer of the Kalinga warriors
   praised by the brahmins.
   They praised the compassion
   of our king Abhayan whose arms are adorned with garlands.
   591. The peys praised our king Manukula Deepan..
   They praised the Chola king, the ruler
   of the lands in all eight directions.
   They praise his faultless fame.
   They praised him saying he conquered Sisupalan
   and revealed the lies of his enemies
   in front of the assembled kings.
   592. They praised the king of the Kaveri river.
   They praised the king of the Porunai river.
   They praised the husband of the virgin queen.
   They praised him, the beloved of the Ganges.
   593. The peys praised the king with his wheel of justice
   rules the wide lands surrounded by all seven oceans.
   They praised the king
   and he will protect his land until the end of the earth.
   594. The peys praised our king
   guardian of the earth just like Karikālan
   who protected the land saying,
   “It is my duty to create the second time
   the earth that was created by Brahma, seated on a lotus as he rules.”
   595. “May all be happy.
   May Dharma flourish everywhere.
   May the sweet grace of the gods spread everywhere.
   May the sages receive the benefit of their tapas.
   596.“May the good paths of the Vedas spread everywhere!
   May cruel famine that Abhayan vanquished disappear!
   May the fame of the kings who protect the earth spread!
   May the earth remain forever. May rain pour always.”
   SUBHAM
   -----------

                                Extra poems:

   After 133:
   The goddess is never separated from Shiva.
   How can one praise the power of the goddess,
   abiding always with him
   as the inner meaning of “om.”
   After 589:
   Some of the peys pretended they were chieftains,
   and carried drums, royal umbrellas, chowries, garlands,
   tall banners and sounding conches.
   They praised the king and said,
   “May the king give his grace
   so that we may always bring tribute for him
   and worship his ankleted feet.”
   The peys praised the king and sang,
   “Our king comes in the divine lineage of the Sun.
   He is the god Indira, Abhayan, the protector,
   Ahalangan, the faultless one,
   and Arintaman, the best of all.
   Let us praise his limitless fame.”
   ------------
                     ___________________________________

           cayaṅkoṇṭār iyaṟṟiya kaliṅkattup paraṇi

   1. kaṭavuḷ vāḻttu          20 ( 1 - 20)
   2. kaṭai tiṟappu           54 ( 21 - 74)
   3. kāṭu pāṭiyatu           22 ( 75 - 96)
   4. kōyil pāṭiyatu          24 ( 97 - 120)
   5. tēviyaip pāṭiyatu       13 (121 - 133)
   6. pēykaḷaip pāṭiyatu      19 (134 - 152)
   7. intira cālam            25 (153 - 177)
   8. irāca pārampariyam      34 (178 - 211)
   9. pēy muṟaippāṭu          20 (212 - 231)
   10. avatāram               80 (232 - 311)
   11. kāḷikkuk kūḷi kūṟiyatu 92 (312 - 403)
   12. pōr pāṭiyatu           68 (404 - 471)
   13. kaḷam pāṭiyatu         125 (472 - 596)

   -------------

                       1. kaṭavuḷ vāḻttu (1-20)

   civa vaṇakkam
   1. puyalvaṇṇaṉ puṉalvārkkap pūmicaiyōṉ
   toḻilkāṭṭap puvaṉavāḻkkaic
   ceyalvaṇṇam nilainiṟutta malaimakaḷaip
   puṇarntavaṉaic cintai ceyvām
   2. arumaṟaiyiṉ neṟikāṭṭa ayaṉpayanta
   nilamakaḷai aṇṭaṅ kākkum
   urimaiyiṉiṟ kaippiṭitta upayakulōt
   tamaṉapayaṉ vāḻka veṉṟē.
   tirumāl vaṇakkam
   3. oruvayiṟṟiṟ piṟavātu
   piṟantaruḷi ulakoṭukkum
   tiruvayiṟṟiṟṟu orukuḻavi
   tirunāmam paravutumē.
   4. anneṭumāl utarampōl
   aruḷapayaṉ taṉikkavikai
   inneṭumā nilamaṉaittum
   potintiṉitu vāḻkaveṉṟē.
   nāṉmukaṉ vaṇakkam
   5. ukanāṉkum poruḷnāṉkum
   upaniṭatam orunāṉkum
   mukanāṉkum paṭaittuṭaiya
   mutalvaṉaiyām paravutumē.
   6. nilanāṉkum ticaināṉkum
   neṭuṅkaṭalkaḷ orunāṉkum
   kulanāṉkum kāttaḷikkum
   kulatīpaṉ vāḻkaveṉṟē.
   ñāyiṟṟu vaṇakkam
   7. pērāḻi ulakaṉaittum piṟaṅkavaḷar iruḷ nīṅka
   ōrāḻi taṉainaṭattum oṇcuṭaraip paravutumē.
   8. paṉiyāḻi ulakaṉaittum parantakali yiruḷnīṅkat
   taṉiyāḻi taṉainaṭattum cayatuṅkaṉ vāḻkaveṉṟē.
   yāṉaimukaṉ vaṇakkam
   9. kāraṇakā riyaṅkaḷiṉkaṭ ṭaṟuppōr yōkak
   karutteṉṉun taṉittaṟiyiṟ kaṭṭak kaṭṭuṇṭu
   āraṇamā nāṟkūṭat taṇaintu niṟkum
   aiṅkarattatu orukaḷiṟṟukku aṉpu ceyvām.
   10. taṉittaṉiyē ticaiyāṉait taṟika ḷākac
   cayattampam palanāṭṭi orukū ṭattē
   aṉaittulakuṅ kavittateṉak kavittu niṟkum
   aruṭkavikaik kalippakaiñaṉ vāḻkaveṉṟē.
   āṟumukaṉ vaṇakkam
   11. poṉṉiraṇṭu varaitōṟkum poruvariya
   niṟampaṭaitta puyamum kaṇṇum
   paṉṉiraṇṭum āṟiraṇṭum paṭaittuṭaiyāṉ
   aṭittalaṅkaḷ paṇital ceyvām.
   12. ōriraṇṭu tirukkulamum nilaipeṟavantu
   orukuṭaikkīḻk kaṭalun tikkum
   īriraṇṭu paṭaittuṭaiya iravikulōt
   tamaṉapayaṉ vāḻka veṉṟē.
   nāmakaḷ vaṇakkam
   13. pūmātuñ cayamātum polintu vāḻum
   puyattiruppa mikavuyarat tiruppaḷ eṉṟu
   nāmātum kalaimātum eṉṉac ceṉṉi
   nāvakattuḷ iruppāḷai navilu vāmē.
   14. eṇmaṭaṅku pukaḻmaṭantai nallaṉ eṅkōṉ
   yāṉavaṉpāl iruppatunaṉ ṟeṉpāḷpōla
   maṇmaṭantai taṉcīrtti veḷḷai cātti
   makiḻntapirāṉ vaḷavarpirāṉ vāḻka veṉṟē.
   umai vaṇakkam
   15. ceyyatiru mēṉiyoru pātikari tākat
   teyvamutal nāyakaṉai eytacilai māraṉ
   kaiyiṉmalar pātamalar mītumaṇu kānam
   kaṉṉitaṉ malarkkaḻalkaḷceṉṉimicai vaippām.
   16. kaṟuttaceḻi yaṉkaḻalci vappavarai yēṟak
   kārmukamva ḷaittuutiyar kōmakaṉmuṭikkaṇ
   poṟuttamalar pātamalar mītaṇiya nalkum
   pūḻiyarpi rāṉapayaṉ vāḻkaiṉi teṉṟē.
   aṉṉaiyar eḻuvar vaṇakkam
   17. mēti puḷḷalakai tōkai yēṟuvaṇam
   vēḻam eṉṟakoṭi ēḻuṭaic
   cōti meṉkoṭikaḷ ēḻiṉ ēḻirutu
   ṇaippa tantoḻani ṉaittumē.
   18. kēḻal mēḻikalai yāḷi vīṇaicilai
   keṇṭai eṉṟiṉaiya palkoṭi
   tāḻa mēruvilu yartta cempiyarta
   ṉippu likkoṭita ḻaikkavē.
   vāḻttu
   19. vitimaṟai yavartoḻil viḷaikavē
   viḷaitaliṉ mukilmaḻai poḻikavē
   nititaru payirvaḷam niṟaikavē
   niṟaitaliṉ uyirnilai peṟukavē.
   20. talamutal uḷamaṉu vaḷarkavē
   cayataraṉ uyarpuli vaḷarkavē
   nilavumiḻ kavikaiyum vaḷarkavē
   nitipoḻi kavikaiyum vaḷarkavē.
   -----------
   ---------

                        2. kaṭai tiṟappu (21-74).

   uṟuppunalaṅ kūṟi viḷittatu
   21. cūtaḷavu aḷaveṉum iḷamulait
   tuṭiyaḷavu aḷaveṉum nuṇṇiṭaik
   kātaḷavu aḷaveṉum matarviḻik
   kaṭalamu taṉaiyavar tiṟamiṉō.
   mulai nalaṅ kūṟi viḷittatu
   22. puṭaipaṭa iḷamulai vaḷartoṟum
   poṟaiaṟi vuṭaiyarum nilaitaḷarntu
   iṭaipaṭu vatupaṭa aruḷuvīr
   iṭukatavu uyarkaṭai tiṟamiṉō.
   naṭaiyaḻaku kūṟi viḷittatu
   23. curikuḻal acaivuṟa acaivuṟat
   tuyileḻum mayileṉa mayileṉap
   paripura oliyeḻa oliyeḻap.
   paṉimoḻi yavarkaṭai tiṟamiṉō.
   kaṉavunilai kūṟi viḷittatu
   24. kūṭiya iṉkaṉa vataṉilē
   koṭainara tuṅkaṉoṭu aṇaivuṟātu
   ūṭiya neñciṉoṭu ūṭuvīr
   umatu neṭuṅkaṭai tiṟamiṉō.
   ūṭalnilai kūṟi viḷittatu
   25. viṭumiṉ eṅkaḷtukil viṭumiṉ eṉṟumuṉi
   vekuḷi meṉ kutalai tukiliṉaip
   piṭimiṉ eṉṟaporuḷ viḷaiya niṉṟaruḷcey
   peṭaina līrkaṭaikaḷ tiṟamiṉō.
   kaṉavunilai kūṟi viḷittatu
   26. eṉata ṭaṅkaiṉi vaḷava tuṅkaṉaruḷ
   eṉama kiḻntuiravu kaṉaviṭait
   taṉata ṭaṅkaḷmicai nakana ṭantakuṟi
   taṭavu vīrkaṭaikaḷ tiṟamiṉō.
   ūṭal uvakai nilai kūṟi viḷittatu
   27. muṉipavar ottilarāy muṟuvalki ḷaittalumē
   mukiḻnakai peṟṟameṉā makiḻnarma ṇittuvarvāy
   kaṉipava ḷattarukē varutalum muttutirum
   kayalkaḷi raṇṭuṭaiyīr kaṭaitiṟa miṉtiṟamiṉ.
   poyttuyil nilai kūṟi viḷittatu
   28. ittuyil meyttuyilē eṉṟuku ṟittiḷaiñōr
   itupula vikkumarun teṉamaṉam vaittaṭiyil
   kaittalam vaittalumē poyttuyil kūrnayaṉak
   kaṭaitiṟa vāmaṭavīr kaṭaitiṟa miṉtiṟaṉ.
   kaṉavunilai kūṟi viḷittatu
   29. ikali ḻantaracar toḻava ruppavaṉi
   iravu kantaruḷu kaṉaviṉil
   pakali ḻantaniṟai peṟamu yaṉṟumoḻi
   pataṟu vīrkaṭaikaḷ tiṟamiṉō.
   paṟkuṟiyaṇi kūṟi viḷittatu
   30. muttu vaṭañcēr mukiḻmulaimēl
   muyaṅkuṅ koḻunar maṇiccevvāy
   vaitta pavaḷa vaṭampuṉaivīr
   maṇippoṟ kapāṭam tiṟamiṉō.
   kulōttuṅkaṉpāl koṇṭa maiyalkūṟi viḷittatu
   31. taṇkoṭai māṉataṉ mārputōy
   tātaki mālaiyiṉ mēlviḻum
   kaṇkoṭu pōmvaḻi tēṭuvīr
   kaṉakane ṭuṅkaṭai tiṟamiṉō.
   ituvum atu
   32. añciyē kayalkeṭak kūṭaliṟ porutuceṉṟu
   aṇikaṭaik kuḻaiyilē viḻaaṭart teṟitalāl
   vañcimā ṉataṉviṭum paṭaiyiṉiṟ koṭiyakaṇ
   maṭanalīr iṭumaṇik kaṭaitiṟan tiṭumiṉō.
   puṇarcci nilai kūṟi viḷittatu
   33. avacamuṟ ṟuḷamnekat tuyilnekap pavaḷavāy
   aṇicivap paṟaviḻik kaṭaicivap puṟaniṟaik
   kavacamaṟṟu iḷanakaik kaḷivarak kaḷivarum
   kaṇavaraip puṇaruvīr kaṭaitiṟan tiṭumiṉō.
   kalavi mayakka nilai kūṟi viḷitta
   34. kalavikkaḷiyiṉ mayakkattāṟ
   kalaipōy akalak kalaimatiyiṉ
   nilavait tukileṉ ṟeṭuttuṭuppīr
   nīḷpoṟ kapāṭan tiṟamiṉō.
   kāmamayakkanilai kūṟi viḷittatu
   35. naṉaviṉiṟ cayataraṉ puṇaravē peṟiṉunīr
   naṉaveṉak teḷivuṟātu ataṉaiyum paḻaiyaak
   kaṉaveṉak kūṟuvīr tōḻi mār nakaimukaṅ
   kaṇṭapiṉ tēṟuvīr kaṭaitiṟan tiṭumiṉō.
   ūṭalum kūṭalum viḻainta iyalpukūṟi viḷittatu
   36. meyyē koḻunar piḻainaliya
   vēṭkai naliya viṭiyaḷavum
   poyyē uṟaṅkum maṭanallīr
   puṉaipoṟ kapāṭam tiṟamiṉō.
   kalavi mayakkanilai kūṟi viḷittatu
   37. pōka amaḷik kaḷimayakkil
   pularnta taṟiyā tēkoḻunar
   āka amaḷi micaittuyilvīr
   ampoṟ kapāṭam tiṟamiṉō.
   kaṇavar varavu pārkkum nilai kūṟi viḷittatu
   38. āḷuṅ koḻunar varavupārttu
   avartam varavu kāṇāmal
   tāḷum maṉamum puṟampākac
   cāttum kapāṭam tiṟamiṉō.
   koṅkaiyiṉ aḻaku kūṟi viḷittatu
   39. untic cuḻiyiṉ muḷaitteḻunta
   urōmap pacuntāḷ oṉṟil iraṇṭu
   antik kamalaṅ koṭuvaruvīr
   ampoṟ kapāṭam tiṟamiṉō.
   peṇkaḷ vēḷam pukunta taṉmai kūṟi viḷittatu
   40. mīṉampuku koṭimīṉavar viḻiyampuka ōṭik
   kāṉampuka vēḷampuku maṭavīr kaṭai tiṟamiṉ.
   peṇkaḷait tiṟaiyākap peṟṟamai kūṟi viḷittatu
   41. alaināṭiya puṉalnāṭuṭai apayaṟkiṭu tiṟaiyā
   malaināṭiyar tuḷunāṭiyar maṉaiyiṟkaṭai tiṟamiṉ.
   kaṇavarō ṭuṭaṉuṟaiyunilai kūṟi viḷittatu
   42. vilaiyi lātavaṭam mulaiyi lāṭaviḻi
   kuḻaiyi lāṭaviḻai kaṇavartōḷ
   malaiyi lāṭivaru mayilkaḷ pōlavaru
   maṭana līrkaṭaikaḷ tiṟamiṉō.
   peṇkaḷait tiṟaiyākap peṟṟamai kūṟi viḷittatu
   41. alaināṭiya puṉalnāṭuṭai apayaṟkiṭu tiṟaiyā
   malaināṭiyar tuḷunāṭiyar maṉaiyiṟkaṭai tiṟamiṉ.
   kaṇavarō ṭuṭaṉuṟaiyunilai kūṟi viḷittatu
   42. vilaiyi lātavaṭam mulaiyi lāṭaviḻi
   kuḻaiyi lāṭaviḻai kaṇavartōḷ
   malaiyi lāṭivaru mayilkaḷ pōlavaru
   maṭana līrkaṭaikaḷ tiṟamiṉō.
   kaṉṉaṭa nāṭṭiṉarāṉa peṇkaḷai viḷittatu
   43. maḻalaittiru moḻiyiṟcila vaṭukum cila tamiḻum
   kuḻaṟittaru karunāṭiyar kaṟukikkaṭai tiṟamiṉ.
   ūṭalum kūṭalum viḻainta iyalpu kūṟi viḷittatu
   44. taḻuvuṅ koḻunar piḻainaliyat
   taḻuvēl eṉṉat taḻuviyakai
   vaḻuva uṭaṉē mayaṅkiṭuvīr
   maṇippoṟ kapāṭam tiṟamiṉō.
   nakaiyiṉ ciṟappuk kūṟi viḷittatu
   45. vēkam viḷaiya varuṅkoḻunar
   mēṉi civanta paṭinōkkip
   pōkam viḷaiya nakaiceyvīr
   puṉaipoṟ kapāṭam tiṟamiṉō.
   tuyileḻunta nilaikūṟi viḷittatu
   46. coruku kontaḷakam orukai mēlalaiya
   orukai kīḻalaicey tukiloṭē
   tiruva ṉantaliṉum mukama larntuvaru
   terivai mīrkaṭaikaḷ tiṟamiṉō.
   nakakkuṟi kaṇṭu kaḷittamai kūṟi viḷittatu
   47. mulaimītu koḻunarkain nakamēvu kuṟiyai
   muṉcelva millāta avarpeṟṟa poruḷpōl
   kalainīvi yārēṉu millāvi ṭattē
   kaṇṇuṟṟu neñcaṅka ḷippīrkaḷ tiṟamiṉa.
   viḻi iyalpu kūṟi viḷittatu
   48. kaṭalil viṭameṉa amuteṉa mataṉavēḷ
   karuti vaḻipaṭu paṭaiyoṭu karutuvār
   uṭaliṉ uyiraiyum uṇarvaiyum naṭuvupōy
   uruvu matarviḻi yuṭaiyavar tiṟamiṉō.
   tōṟṟa iyalpu kūṟi viḷittatu
   49. muṟuval mālaiyoṭu taraḷa mālaimuka
   malariṉ mītummulai mukiḻiṉum
   ciṟuni lāvumatiṉ mikuti lāvumeṉa
   varuna līrkaṭaikaḷ tiṟamiṉō.
   maṉaṅkavarum iyalpu kūṟi viḷittatu
   50. murukiṟ civanta kaḻunīrum
   mutirā iḷaiñar āruyirum
   tirukic cerukum kuḻalmaṭavīr
   cempoṟ kapāṭam tiṟamiṉō.
   kūṭal iḻaitta iyalpu kūṟi viḷittatu
   51. meyyila ṇaitturukip paiyaa kaṉṟavartām.
   mīḷvare ṉakkarutik kūṭalvi ḷaittuaṟavē
   kaiyila ṇaittamaṇal kaṇpaṉi cōrpuṉalil
   karaiyavi ḻuntaḻuvīr kaṭaitiṟa miṉtiṟamiṉ .
   ūṭal iyalpu kūṟi viḷittal
   52. ceruviḷa nīrpaṭa vemmulaic
   cevviḷa nīrpaṭu cēyarik
   karuviḷa nīrpaṭa ūṭuvīr
   kaṉakane ṭuṅkaṭai tiṟamiṉō.
   kalavi nilaikūṟi viḷittatu
   53. aḷaka pāramicai acaiya mēkalaikaḷ
   aviḻa āparaṇa mivaiyelām
   iḷaka māmulaikaḷ iṇaiya ṟāmalvarum
   iyaṉa līrkaṭaikaḷ tiṟamiṉō.
   ituvum atu
   54. matura māṉamoḻi pataṟa vāṉviḻici
   vappa vāyitaḻve ḷuppavē
   atara pāṉamatu pāṉa mākaaṟi
   vaḻiyu mātarkaṭai tiṟamiṉō.
   nōyum maruntumāntaṉmai kūṟi viḷittatu
   55. taṅkukaṇ vēlceyta puṇkaḷait
   taṭamulai vētukoṇ ṭoṟṟiyum
   ceṅkaṉi vāymarun tūṭṭuvīr
   cempoṉ neṭuṅkaṭai tiṟamiṉō.
   ituvum atu
   56. poruṅkaṇ vēliḷaiñar mārpi ṉūṭuruvu
   puṇkaḷ tīrairu koṅkaiyiṉ
   karuṅkaṇ vētupaṭa oṟṟi meṉkaikoṭu
   kaṭṭu mātarkaṭai tiṟamiṉō.
   kūntaliyalpu kūṟi viḷittatu
   57. iṭaiyi ṉilaiyari tiṟumiṟu meṉaeḻā
   ematu pukaliṭam iṉiilai yeṉaviḻā
   aṭaiya matukaram eḻuvatu viḻuvatām
   aḷaka vaṉitaiyar aṇikaṭai tiṟamiṉō.
   naṭai iyalpukūṟi viḷittatu
   58. upaya taṉamacaiyil oṭiyumiṭai naṭaiyai
   oḻiyum oḻiyumeṉa oṇcilampu
   apaya mapayameṉa alaṟa naṭaipayilum
   arivai mīrkaṭaikaḷ tiṟamiṉō.
   kāviriyai oppukkūṟi viḷittatu
   59. pūviri matukaram nukaravum
   porukayal irukarai puraḷavum
   kāviri eṉavarum maṭanalīr
   kaṉakane ṭuṅkaṭai tiṟamiṉō.
   kūntaliyalpu kūṟi viḷittatu
   60. kaḷapa vaṇṭaliṭu kalaca koṅkaikaḷiṉ
   matie ḻuntukaṉal coriyumeṉṟu
   aḷaka pantimicai aḷikaḷ pantariṭum
   arivai mīrkaṭaikaḷ tiṟamiṉō .
   puṇarccinilai kūṟi viḷittatu
   61. vāyiṉ civappai viḻivāṅka
   malarkkaṇ veḷuppai vāyvāṅkat
   tōyak kalavi amutaḷippīr
   tuṅkak kapāṭam tiṟamiṉō.
   ituvum atu
   62. kūṭum iḷampiṟaiyil kuṟuveyar mutturuḷak
   koṅkai vaṭampuraḷac ceṅkaḻu nīraḷakak
   kāṭu kulaintalaiyak kaivaḷai pūcaliṭak
   kalavi viṭāmaṭavīr kaṭaitiṟamiṉ tiṟamiṉ.
   kaliṅkap pōrppāṭal kēṭkumāṟu viḷittatu
   63. kāñci irukkak kaliṅkaṅ kulainta
   kalavi maṭavīr kaḻaṟceṉṉi
   kāñci irukkak kaliṅkaṅ kulainta
   kaḷappōr pāṭat tiṟamiṉō.
   ituvum atu
   64. ilaṅkai eṟinta karuṇā karaṉtaṉ
   ikalveñ cilaiyiṉ valikēṭpīr
   kaliṅkam eṟinta karuṇā karaṉtaṉ
   kaḷappōr pāṭat tiṟamiṉō.
   kātal iyalpu kūṟi viḷittatu
   65. pēṇuṅ koḻunar piḻaikaḷelām
   pirinta poḻutu niṉaintuavaraik
   kāṇum poḻutu maṟantiruppīr
   kaṉappoṟ kapāṭan tiṟamiṉō.
   kaṇavarōṭu payilumiyalpu kūṟi viḷittatu
   66. vāca mārmulaikaḷ mārpi lāṭamatu
   mālai tāḻkuḻaliṉ vaṇṭeḻuntu
   ūca lāṭaviḻi pūca lāṭauṟa
   vāṭu vīrkaṭaikaḷ tiṟamiṉō.
   kalavi mayakka nilai kūṟi viḷittatu
   67. nēyak kalavi mayakkattē
   nikaḻnta moḻiyaik kiḷiyuraippa
   vāyaip putaikkum maṭanallīr
   maṇippoṟ kapāṭam tiṟamiṉō.
   pirivāṟṟā nilaikūṟi viḷittatu
   68. poṅku matikkē tiṉamnaṭuṅkip
   pukunta aṟaiyai nilaaṟaieṉṟu
   aṅkum irukkap payappaṭuvīr
   ampoṟ kapāṭam tiṟamiṉō.
   koḻunar varavupārttirunta nilaikūṟi viḷittatu
   69. varuvār koḻunar eṉattiṟantum
   vārār koḻunar eṉavaṭaittum
   tirukum kuṭumi viṭiyaḷavum
   tēyum kapāṭam tiṟamiṉō.
   kūṭiyum ūṭiyum niṉṟanilai kūṟi viḷittatu
   70. ūṭu vīrkoḻunar taṅkaḷ pāṉmuṉivo
   ḻintu kūṭutaliṉ uṅkaḷait
   tēṭuvīr kaṭaikaḷ tiṟami ṉōiṉiya
   terivai mīrkaṭaikaḷ tiṟamiṉō.
   kaṇṇiyalpu kūṟi viḷittatu
   71. paṇpaṭu kiḷaviyai amuteṉap
   paraviya koḻunaṉai neṟiceyak
   kaṇkoṭu kolaiceya aruḷuvīr
   kaṉakane ṭuṅkaṭai tiṟamiṉō.
   pirivāṟṟā viyalpu kūṟi viḷittatu
   72. piḻaini ṉainturuki aṇaivu ṟāmakiḻnar
   pirital añciviṭu kaṇkaṇīr
   maḻaita tumpaviral taraiyi lēeḻutu
   maṭana līrkaṭaikaḷ tiṟamiṉō.
   kulōttuṅkaṉōṭu oppittu viḷittatu
   73. nakkāñ cikkum vaṭama laikkum
   naṭuvil veḷikkē vēṭaṉaiviṭṭu
   akkā ṉakattē uyirpaṟippīr
   ampoṟ kapāṭam tiṟamiṉō.
   maṉaṅkavarum iyalpu kūṟi viḷittatu
   74. cekkac civanta kaḻunīrum
   cekattil iḷaiña rāruyirum
   okkac cerukum kuḻaṉmaṭavīr
   umpoṟ kapāṭam tiṟamiṉō.
   -----------

                       3. kāṭu pāṭiyatu (75-96)

   tōṟṟuvāy
   75. kaḷappōr viḷainta kaliṅkattuk
   kaliṅkar niṇakkūḻ kaḷappēyiṉ
   uḷappōr iraṇṭu niṟaivittāḷ
   uṟaiyum kāṭu pāṭuvām.
   kāṭṭiṉ iyalpu kūṟiyatu
   76. porinta kārai karinta cūraipu
   kainta vīraiye rinta vēy
   urinta pāraiye ṟinta pālaiyu
   larnta vōmaika lantavē.
   ituvum atu
   77. utirnta veḷḷilu ṇaṅku nelliyo
   ṭuṅku tuḷḷiyu larntavēl
   pitirnta muḷḷici tainta vaḷḷipi
   ḷanta kaḷḷipa rantavē.
   ituvum atu
   78. vaṟṟal vākaiva ṟanta kūkaima
   ṭinta tēṟupo ṭintavēl
   muṟṟa līkaimu ḷinta viṇṭumu
   rinta puṉkuni raintavē.
   nilaiyalpu kūṟiyatu
   79. tīya vakkoṭiya kāṉa kattaraiti
   ṟanta vāytoṟumnu ḻaintutaṉ
   cāyai pukkavaḻi yāte ṉappariti
   taṉka raṅkoṭuti ḷaikkumē.
   niḻaliṉmai kūṟiyatu
   80. āṭu kiṉṟaciṟai vempa runtiṉiḻal
   añci akkaṭuva ṉattaiviṭṭu
   ōṭu kiṉṟaniḻal okku niṟkuniḻal
   ōri ṭattumuḷa allavē.
   ituvum atu
   81. āta vamparukum eṉṟu niṉṟaniḻal
   aṅku niṉṟukuṭi pōṉatap
   pāta vampuṉalpe ṟātu ṇaṅkuvaṉa
   parukum nammaiyeṉa veruviyē.
   puṟāt teṉpaṭal kūṟiyatu
   82. cenne ruppiṉait takaṭu ceytupār
   ceyta tokkumac centa raipparappu
   anne ruppiṉil pukaiti raṇṭatoppu
   allatu oppuṟā ataṉi ṭaippuṟā.
   māṉkaḷ iyalpu kūṟiyatu
   83. tīyiṉ vāyiṉnīr peṟiṉu muṇpatōr
   cintai kūravāy ventu vantucen
   nāyiṉ vāyiṉnīr taṉṉai nīreṉā
   navvi nāviṉāl nakki vikkumē.
   nilattiṉ vemmai kūṟiyatu
   84. inni lattuḷōr ēka lāvataṟku.
   eḷiya tāṉamō ariya vāṉuḷōr
   anni lattiṉmēl vemmai yaikkuṟittu
   alla vōnilattu aṭiyi ṭātatē.
   ituvum atu
   85. irupoḻutum iravipacum puravivicumpu
   iyaṅkātatu iyampak kēṇmiṉ
   orupoḻutun tarittaṉṟi ūṭupō
   karitu aṇaṅkiṉ kāṭeṉ ṟaṉṟō.
   ituvum atu
   86. kāṭitaṉaik kaṭattumeṉak karumukilum
   veṇmatiyuṅ kaṭakka appāl
   ōṭiiḷaittu uṭalviyartta viyarvaṉṟō
   ukupuṉalum paṉiyum aiyō.
   ituvum atu
   87. vimmukaṭu vicaivaṉattiṉ vemmaiyiṉaik
   kuṟittaṉṟō viṇṇōr viṇṇiṉ
   maimmukaṭu mukiṟṟiraiyiṭṭu amutavaṭṭa
   vālavaṭṭam eṭuppa taiyō.
   maraṅkaḷiṉ tōṟṟam kūṟiyatu
   88. nilampuṭaipērn tōṭāmē
   neṭumōṭi niṟuttiyapēy
   pulampoṭuniṉ ṟuyirppaṉapōl
   pukaintumaraṅ karintuḷavāl.
   ituvum atu
   89. vaṟṟiyapēy vāyularntu
   vaṟaḷnākkai nīṭṭuvapōl
   muṟṟiya nīḷ marappotumpiṉ
   mutuppāmpu puṟappaṭumē.
   cūṟāvaḷiyiṉ iyalpu kūṟiyatu
   90. viḻicuḻala varupēyttēr
   mitantuvaru nīrannīrc
   cuḻicuḻala varuvateṉac
   cūṟaivaḷi cuḻaṉṟiṭumāl.
   maṇikaḷ kiṭattal kūṟiyatu
   91. citaintavuṭaṟ cuṭucuṭalaip poṭiyaic cūṟai
   cīttaṭippac citaṟiyavap poṭiyāl cemmai
   putaintamaṇi pukaipōrtta taḻalē pōlum
   pōlāvēṟ poṭimūṭu taṇalē pōlum.
   mūṅkil muttutirtal kūṟiyatu
   92. maṇṇōṭi aṟavaṟantu tuṟantu aṅkānta
   vāyvaḻiyē vēypoḻiyum muttam avvēy
   kaṇṇōṭic corikiṉṟa kaṇṇī raṉṟēl
   kaṇṭiraṅkic corikiṉṟa kaṇṇīr pōlum
   ituvum atu
   93. veṭittakaḻai vicaiteṟippat taraimēl muttam
   vīḻntaṉaat taraipuḻuṅki aḻaṉṟu mēṉmēṟ
   poṭittaviyarp puḷḷikaḷē pōlum pōlum
   pōlāvēl koppuḷaṅkaḷ pōlum pōlum.
   kāṟṟiṉ iyalpu kūṟiyatu
   94. palkāltiṇ tiraikkaraṅkaḷ karaiyiṉ mēṉmēṟ
   pāykaṭalkaḷ nūkkumatu appaṭarveṅ kāṉiṟ
   celkāṟṟu vārāmal kākka aṉṟō
   ticaikkariyiṉ cevikkāṟṟum ataṟkē yaṉṟō.
   veppanilai kūṟiyatu
   95. muḷḷāṟum kallāṟum teṉṉar ōṭa
   miṉṉorunāḷ vāḷapayaṉ muṉinta pōriṉ
   veḷḷāṟum kōṭṭāṟum pukaiyāṉ mūṭa
   ventavaṉam intavaṉam okkil okkum.
   maṇal iyalpu kūṟiyatu
   96. aṇikoṇṭa kuraṅkiṉaṅkaḷa
   alaikaṭalukku appālai
   maṇaloṉṟu kāṇāmal
   varaieṭuttu mayaṅkiṉavē.
   -------------

                       4. kōyil pāṭiyatu (97-120)

   tōṟṟuvāy
   97. ōti vantaak koṭiya kāṉakattu
   uṟaiya ṇaṅkiṉukku ayaṉva kuttavip
   pūta lampaḻaṅ kōyil eṉṉiṉum
   putiya kōyiluṇṭuatu viḷampuvām
   kōyil kaṭaikāl iyalpu kūṟiyatu
   98. vaṭṭa veṇkuṭaic ceṉṉi māṉataṉ
   vāḷiṉ vāyiṉāl maṟali vāyiṭaip
   paṭṭa maṉṉartam paṭṭa maṅkaiyar
   paruma ṇikkarut tirui ruttiyē.
   cuvar iyalpu kūṟiyatu
   99. tuvarni ṟakkaḷiṟṟu utiya rēvaliṉ
   curikai pōrmukattu uruvi nēretirttu
   avarni ṇattoṭuak kuruti nīrkuḻaittu
   avarka runtalaic cuvara ṭukkiyē.
   tūṇ uttira iyalpu kūṟiyatu
   100. aṟiñar tampirāṉ apayaṉ vāraṇam
   aracar maṇṭalat taraṇa ṟappaṟittu
   eṟita rumperuṅ kaṇaima raṅkaḷkoṇṭu
   eḻutu tūṇoṭu uttira miyaṟṟiyē.
   tulām pā iyalpu kūṟiyatu
   101. kaṭita ḻintupōr mitilai yiṟpaṭum
   karima ruppiṉait tiraḷtu lāmeṉum
   paṭipa rappiap paruma yāṉaiyiṉ
   paḻue lumpiṉil pāa ṭukkiyē
   nācikai iyalpu kūṟiyatu
   102. mīḷi māvukaittu apayaṉ muṉṉornāḷ
   viruta rācaraip porutu koṇṭapōr
   āḷi vāraṇaṅ kēḻal cīyameṉṟu
   avaini raittunā cikaiyi ruttiyē.
   mēṟkūrai iyalpu kūṟiyatu
   103. tuṅka pattiraic ceṅ kaḷattiṭaic
   cōḷa cēkaraṉ vāḷe ṟintapōr
   veṅka takkaḷiṟ ṟiṉpa ṭattiṉāl
   veḷia ṭaṅkavē micaika vikkavē
   kōpura matil iyalpu kūṟiyatu
   104. koḷḷivāyp pēykākkum
   kōpuramum neṭumatilum
   veḷḷiyāl camaittateṉa
   veḷḷelumpi ṉālcamaittē
   makaratōraṇa iyalpu kūṟiyatu
   105. kārirumpiṉ makaratō raṇamākak karumpēykaḷ
   ōriraṇṭu kālnāṭṭi ōrirumpai micaivaḷaittē.
   aṇi ceyal vakai kūṟiyatu
   106. mayiṟkaḻuttum kaḻuttariya malarntamukat
   tāmaraiyum maruṅku cūḻnta
   eyiṟkaḻuttum niṇakkoṭiyum iḷaṅkuḻavi
   pacuntalaiyum eṅkum tūkki.
   ituvum atu
   107. paṇiyāta vaḻutiyartam pāykaḷiṟṟiṉ
   ceviccuḷaku palavum tūkki
   maṇiyūcal eṉamaturai makaratō
   raṇampaṟittu maṟittu nāṭṭi.
   ituvum atu
   108. parivirutti alakiṭṭup pacuṅkuruti
   nīrteḷittu niṇappūc cinti
   eriviritta īmaviḷakku emmaruṅkum
   ēṟṟiyatōr iyalpiṟ ṟālō.
   vaḻipāṭṭiyalpu kūṟiyatu
   109. caliyāta taṉiyāṇmait taṟukaṇ vīrar
   tarukavaram varattiṉukkut takka tākap
   paliyāka uṟupparintu tarutum eṉṟu
   paravumoli kaṭalolipōl parakku mālō.
   ituvum atu
   110. collariya ōmattī vaḷarppa rālō
   toḻutiruntu paḻuvelumpu toṭaravāṅki
   valleriyiṉ micaieriya viṭuva rālō
   vaḻikuruti neyyāka vārppa rālō.
   ituvum atu
   111. aṭikkaḻuttiṉ neṭuñcirattai ariva rālō
   arintaciram aṇaṅkiṉkaik koṭuppa rālō
   koṭuttaciram koṟṟavaiyaip paravu mālō
   kuṟaiyuṭalam kumpiṭṭu niṟku mālō.
   paliyiṭṭa talai iyalpu kūṟiyatu
   112. nīṇṭapali pīṭattil arintu vaitta
   neṭuṅkuñcic cirattaittaṉ ṉiṉameṉ ṟeṇṇi
   āṇṭalaippuḷ arukaṇaintu pārkku mālō
   aṇaitalumac ciramacca muṟuttu mālō.
   uṭal kaṇṭa pēynilai kūṟiyatu
   113. kaṭaṉa maintatuka runtalaia rinta poḻutē
   kaṭava toṉṟumilai eṉṟuviḷai yāṭu muṭalē
   uṭalvi ḻuntiṭiṉnu karntiṭau vanta cilapēy
   uṟupe rumpaciuṭaṉṟiṭau ṭaṉtiriyumē.
   erumaikkaṭāp pali kūṟiyatu
   114. pakaṭi ṭantukoḷpa cuṅkuruti iṉṟu talaivi
   palikoḷ eṉṟakural eṇṭicaipi ḷantumicaivāṉ
   mukaṭi ṭanturum eṟinteṉamu ḻaṅka uṭaṉē
   mokumo keṉṟolimi kuntamaru kaṅkaḷ palavē.
   cātakar iyalpu kūṟiyatu
   115. tamaru kaṅkaḷtaru kiṉṟacati yiṉkaṇ varuvār
   amari iṉpuṟuma nātivaru cāta karkaḷē .
   yōkiṉiyar iyalpu kūṟiyatu.
   116. paṭaiva laṅkoṭupa cuntalaii ṭaṅko ṭaṇaivār
   iṭaimo ḻintu iṭainu ṭaṅkavaru yōkiṉikaḷē.
   pēy iyalpu kūṟiyatu
   117. vīṅkutalai neṭuṅkaḻaiyiṉ micaitōṟun
   ticaitōṟum viḻittu niṉṟu
   tūṅkutalai cirippaṉakaṇ ṭuṟaṅkutalai
   maṟantirukkum cuḻalkaṭ cūrppēy.
   paliiṭṭa talai iyalpu kūṟiyatu
   118. arintatalai uṭaṉamarntē āṭukaḻai
   alaikurutip puṉaliṉ mūḻki
   iruntavuṭal koḷakkālaṉ iṭukiṉṟa
   neṭuntūṇṭil eṉṉat tōṉṟum.
   koḷḷivāyp pēy iyalpu kūṟiyatu
   119. kolvāy ōri muḻavākak
   koḷḷi vāyppēy kuḻavikku
   nalvāyc ceyya tacaitēṭi
   narivāyt tacaiyaip paṟikkumāl.
   kāḷi kōyiliṉ cūḻaliṭa iyalpu kūṟiyatu
   120. niṇamum tacaiyum parunticippa
   neruppum parutti yumpōṉṟu
   piṇamum pēyum cuṭukāṭum
   piṇaṅku nariyum uṭaittarō.
   -------------

                     5. tēviyaip pāṭiyatu (121-133)

   tōṟṟuvāy
   121. uvaiyuvai uḷaeṉ ṟeṇṇi
   uraippa teṉuraik kavanta
   avai avai makiḻnta mōṭi
   avayavam viḷampal ceyvām,
   iṇaiyaṭic ciṟappuk kūṟiyatu
   122. orumalai mattuvalittu ulavuka yiṟṟiṉumaṟṟu
   ulakupa rittapaṇattu urakava ṭattiṉumap
   parumaṇi muttuniraittu uṭumaṇi taittaiṇaip
   paripuram vaittataḷirp patayuka ḷattiṉaḷē.
   kūttiṉ ciṟappuk kūṟiyatu
   123. aravoṭu tikkayamap poḻutupa rittaviṭattu
   aṭiyiṭa uṭkuḻivuṟṟu acaivuṟum appoḻutil
   taraṇita rittateṉap paraṇipa rittapukaḻc
   cayatara ṉaipparavic catikoḷna ṭattiṉaḷē.
   taṉattiṉ ciṟappuk kūṟiyatu
   124. taṇitava ḷappiṟaiyaic caṭaimicai vaittaviṭait
   talaivarva ṉattiṉiṭait taṉinukar taṟkuniṉaittu
   aṇitava ḷappoṭiyiṭṭu aṭaiyavi lacciṉaiyiṭṭu
   amutami ruttiyacep paṉaiyata ṉattiṉaḷē.
   uṭaic ciṟappuk kūṟiyatu
   125. parivaka lattaḻuvip puṇarkala vikkurukip
   paṭarcaṭai mukkaṇuṭaip paramarko ṭuttakaḷiṟṟu
   urimicai yakkariyiṟ kuṭaroṭu kaṭceviyiṭṭu
   orupuri iṭṭuiṟukap puṉaiyumu ṭukkaiyaḷē.
   vayiṟṟiṉ ciṟappuk kūṟiyatu
   126. kalaivaḷar uttamaṉaik karumukil oppavaṉaik
   karaṭata ṭakkaṭavuṭ kaṉakani ṟattavaṉaic
   cilaivaḷai vuṟṟavuṇat tokaiceka viṭṭaparit
   tiṟalava ṉaittarumat tiruuta rattiṉaḷē.
   mēlāṭaic ciṟappuk kūṟiyatu
   127. kavaḷama takkaraṭak kariyuri vaikkayilaik
   kaḷiṟuvi ruppuṟumak kaṉakamu laittaraḷat
   tavaḷava ṭattiṭaiyiṟ pavaḷamo ṭotteriyat
   taḻalumiḻ uttariyat taṉiura kattiṉaḷē.
   kaiyiṉ ciṟappuk kūṟiyatu
   128. ariyumi ṭaṟṟalaiyiṭṭu alaikuru tikketirvaittu
   aṟavuma ṭuttacivap pataṉaimu ḻutticaiyiṉ
   karikara ṭattoḷaiyiṉ kaluḻiyi ṭaikkaḻuvik
   karumaipa ṭaittacuṭark karakama lattiṉaḷē.
   utaṭṭiṉ ciṟappuk kūṟiyatu
   129. cimaiyava raikkaṉakat tiraḷuru kapparavait
   tiraicuva ṟippukaiyat ticaicuṭu mappoḻutattu
   imaiyava raittakaitaṟku iruḷumi ṭaṟṟiṟaivataṟku
   iṉiyata rattamutak kaṉiyata rattiṉaḷē
   vāyiṉ ciṟappuk kūṟiyatu
   130. urukuta laitto ṭaiyaṟku vamaiya ṟaccuḻalvuṟṟu
   ulavuvi ḻikkaṭaipaṭṭu uṭalpakai yaṟṟoḻiyat
   tirukuravaik kiḷavic ciṟukuta laippavaḷac
   ciṟumuṟu vaṟṟaraḷat tiruvata ṉattiṉaḷē.
   tirumukac ciṟappuk kūṟiyatu
   131. arumaṟai yottakulattu,aruṇeṟiyotta kuṇattu
   apayaṉu tittakulattu upayaku lattumutal
   tirumati yokkumeṉat tiṉakara ṉokkumeṉat
   tikaḻvata ṉattiṉiṭait tilakava ṉappiṉaḷē.
   pēruruvac ciṟappuk kūṟiyatu
   132. aṇṭamuṟu kulakirikaḷ
   avaḷorukāl irukātil
   koṇṭaṇiyiṉ kutampaiyumām
   kōttaṇiyiṉ maṇivaṭamām.
   ituvum atu
   133. kaimmalarmēl ammaṉaiyām
   kantukamām kaḻaṅkumām
   ammalaikaḷ avaḷvēṇṭiṉ
   ākāta toṉṟuṇṭō.
   *ōṅkārat tuṭporuḷāy
   oruvātu naṭantāḷai
   nīṅkāmal niṉṟāḷai
   evvaṇṇam nikaḻttuvām.
   ------------

                    6. pēykaḷaip pāṭiyatu (134-152)

   tōṟṟuvāy
   134. evvaṇaṅkum aṭivaṇaṅka
   ipperumai paṭaittuṭaiya
   avvaṇaṅkai akalāta
   alakaikaḷai iṉippakarvām.
   pēykaḷiṉ kaikāl iyalpu kūṟiyatu
   135. perune ṭumpaci peykala māvaṉa
   piṟṟai nāḷiṉmuṉ ṉāḷiṉ melivaṉa
   karune ṭumpaṉaṅ kāṭumu ḻumaiyuṅ
   kāluṅ kaiyumu ṭaiyaṉa pōlvaṉa.
   vāy, vayiṟu muḻantāḷ iyalpu kūṟiyatu
   136. vaṉpi lattoṭu vātucey vāyiṉa
   vāyi ṉālniṟai yātava yiṟṟiṉa
   muṉpi rukkiṉmu kattiṉu mēṟcela
   mummu ḻampaṭum ammuḻan tāḷiṉa.
   uṭampiṉ iyalpu kūṟiyatu
   137. veṟṟe lūmpaina rampiṉva littumēl
   venti lāviṟa kēyntavu ṭampiṉa
   koṟṟa lampeṟu kūḻilam eṅkaḷaik
   koḷva tēpaṇi yeṉṟuku raippaṉa
   kaṉṉam, viḻi, iyalpu kūṟiyatu
   138. uḷḷo ṭuṅkiyi raṇṭumoṉ ṟākavē
   oṭṭi oṭṭivi ṭātako ṭiṟṟiṉa
   koḷḷi koṇṭiraṇ ṭēmuḻai yuṭpukiṉ
   kuṉṟu tōṉṟuva pōlavi ḻippaṉa.
   mutuku, unti iyalpu kūṟiyatu
   139. vaṟṟa lākau larntamu tukukaḷ
   marakka lattiṉma ṟipuṟa moppaṉa
   oṟṟai vāṉtoḷaip puṟṟeṉap pāmpuṭaṉ
   uṭumpu muṭpukku ṟaṅkiṭum untiya .
   uṭal, mayir, mūkku, cevi iyalpu kūṟiyatu
   140. pāntaḷ nālvaṉa pōlumu ṭalmayir
   pāci paṭṭapa ḻantoḷai mūkkiṉa
   āntai pāntiyi ruppattu riñcilpukku
   aṅku miṅkumu lāvuce viyaṉa.
   pal, tāli, talai utaṭu iyalpu kūṟiyatu
   141. koṭṭu mēḻiyuṅ kōttaṉa palliṉa
   kōmpi pāmpiṭaik kōttaṇi tāliya
   taṭṭi vāṉaitta karkkun talaiyiṉa
   tāḻntu mārpiṭait taṭṭumu taṭṭiṉa.
   pēykkuḻavikaḷiṉ iyalpu kūṟiyatu
   142. aṭṭa miṭṭane ṭuṅkaḻai kāṇileṉ
   aṉṉai yaṉṉaiyeṉ ṟāluṅku ḻaviya
   oṭṭa voṭṭakaṅ kāṇileṉ piḷḷaiyai
   okku mokkumeṉ ṟokkalai koḷvaṉa.
   pēyiṉ paci iyalpu kūṟiyatu
   143. puyala ḷippaṉa mēluma ḷittiṭum
   poṟka rattapa yaṉpuli piṉcelak
   kayalo ḷittaka ṭuñcuram pōlakaṅ
   kāntu vempaci yiṟpuṟan tīntavum.
   kāḷiyaic cūḻnta pēy iruppuk kūṟiyatu
   144. tuñca lukkaṇit tāmeṉa muṉṉamē
   coṉṉa coṉṉatu ṟaitoṟum pēyelām
   añca littoru kālaka lāmalav
   vaṇaṅki ṉukkaru kākavi rukkavē.
   kālmuṭap pēyaik kūṟiyatu
   145. āḷaic cīṟuka ḷiṟṟapa yaṉporūum
   akka ḷattila racarci rañcori
   mūḷaic cēṟṟilva ḻukkivi ḻuntiṭa
   moḻipe yarntoru kāṉmuṭa māṉavum.
   kaimmuṭap pēyaik kūṟiyatu
   146. anta nāḷakka ḷattaṭu kūḻiṉukku
   āynta veṇpalla riciyuraṟpuka
   untu pōtiṉiṟ pōtakak kompeṉum
   ulakkai paṭṭuva lakkaicoṟ ṟāṉavum.
   kuruṭṭup pēyaik kūṟiyatu
   147. viruta rācapa yaṅkaraṉ muṉṉornāḷ
   veṉṟa cakkarak kōṭṭatti ṭaikkoḻuṅ
   kuruti yuṅkuṭa ruṅkalantu aṭṭaveṅ
   kūḻte ṟittoru kaṇkuru ṭāṉavum.
   ūmaippēyaik kūṟiyatu
   148. vaṇṭal pāypoṉṉi nāṭaṉai vāḻttimā
   maturai veṅkaḷat tēmatu rikkaaṭ
   ṭuṇṭa kūḻoṭu nāvuñcu ruṇṭupukku
   uḷvi ḻuntaṟa ūmaika ḷāṉavum
   ceviṭṭup pēyaik kūṟiyatu
   149. āṉai cāyava ṭupari oṉṟukaittu
   aimpa ṭaipparu vattuapa yaṉporuñ
   cēṉai vīrarniṉ ṟārttiṭum ārppiṉil
   timiri veṅkaḷat tiṟcevi ṭāṉavum.
   kuṟaṭ pēyaik kūṟiyatu
   150. paṇṭu teṉṉavar cāyaa taṟkumuṉ
   paṇicey pūtaka ṇaṅkaḷa ṉaittaiyuṅ
   koṇṭu vantapēy kūṭiya pōtilak
   kumari mātarpe ṟakkuṟa ḷāṉavum.
   kūṉ pēyaik kūṟiyatu
   151. parakku pōtakka ṭārama ḻittanāḷ
   pāynta cempuṉa lāṭiyum nīntiyum
   kurakku vātampi ṭittavi tattiṉil
   kuṭiya ṭaṅkaluṅ kūṉmutu kāṉavum.
   tiṟanta viraṟpēyaik kūṟiyatu
   152. ciṅka ḷattoṭu teṉmatu rāpuri
   ceṟṟa koṟṟavaṉ veṟṟikoḷ kālaiyē
   veṅka ḷattil aṭumaṭaip pēykkulam
   vēlai pukkuvi ralkaḷ tiṟantavum

                         7. intira cālam (153-177)

   kāḷiyiṉ kaṭṭil
   153. ivvaṇṇatta irutiṟamun toḻutiruppa
   elumpiṉmicaik kuṭarmeṉ kacciṟ
   cevvaṇṇak kurutitōy ciṟupūtat
   tīpakkāl kaṭṭi liṭṭē.
   kaṭṭil mēl aṇai
   154. piṇamettai yañcaṭukkip pēyaṇaiyai
   muṟittiṭṭum tūya veḷḷai
   niṇamettai virittuyarnta nilāttikaḻum
   pañcacaya ṉattiṉ mēlē.
   kāḷiyiṉ iruppu
   155. keṭātapaṭi keṭuñceḻiyar keṭumpoḻutiṉ
   iṭumpiṇṭi pālam ēnti
   iṭākiṉikaḷ irumaruṅkum īccōppip
   paṇimāṟa irunta pōḻtiṉ.
   neṭumpēy ceyti kūṟiyatu
   156. aṭalnāka velumpeṭuttu narampiṟ kaṭṭi
   aṭittaṭiyum piṭittuamariṉ maṭinta vīrar
   kuṭarcūṭi niṇaccaṭṭai yiṭṭu niṉṟa
   kōyilnā yakineṭumpēy kumpiṭṭu āṅkē.
   neṭumpēy kāḷikkuk kūṟal
   157. curakuruviṉ tūtāki yamaṉpāṟ celvōṉ
   tuṇittuvaitta ciramaṉṟu tiṉṟapēyaic
   ciramariya vataṟkuṟavāy oḷittup pōnt
   cilapēyait tiruvuḷḷat taṟiti yaṉṟē.
   oru mutupēyiṉ varukai kūṟiyatu
   158. appēyi ṉorumutupēy vantu niṉṟiṅku
   aṭiyēṉai viṇṇappañ ceyka eṉṟatu
   ippēyiṅ korutīṅkuñ ceyta tillai
   eṉkolō tiruvuḷḷam eṉṉak kēṭṭē.
   mutupēy kāḷi tirumuṉ aṇukiyatu kūṟiyatu
   159. aḻaikka veṉṟalum aḻaikka vantaṇuki
   añci yañciuṉa tāṇaiyiṉ
   piḻaikka vantaṉampo ṟutte makkaruḷcey
   peṇṇa ṇaṅkeṉava ṇaṅkavē.
   mutupēykkuk kāḷi moḻintatu kūṟiyatu
   160. arutti yiṟpiḻaini ṉaitta kūḷiyai
   aṟutta vaṉtalaiya vaṉpeṟap
   porutti appiḻaipo ṟutta ṉampiḻai
   poṟāta tillaiyiṉi yeṉṉavē.
   mutupēy moḻintatu kūṟiyatu
   161. uyntu pōyiṉamu vante makkaruḷa
   oṉṟō ṭoppaṉavo rāyiram
   intira cālamuḷa kaṟṟu vantaṉeṉ
   iruntu kāṇeṉai ṟaiñciyē.
   tutikkai, yāṉait talaikaḷāṉa intiracālam kūṟiyatu
   162. ēṟa niṉṉiruti rukkaṇ vaittaruḷcey
   ikkai yiṟcilatu tikkaipār
   māṟi yikkaiyila maikka maṟṟavai
   matakka rittalaikaḷ āṉapār.
   yāṉait talaiyuṭaṉ kuṟaiyuṭalum kāṭṭiya
   intiracālam kūṟiyatu
   163. ikka rittalaiyiṭaṉ vāyi ṉiṉṟu utira
   nīrkuṭittu urumi ṭitteṉak
   kokka rittu alakai cuṟṟa maṟṟivai
   kuṟaitta laippiṇammi tappapār.
   mutupēy paraṇikāṭṭat toṭaṅkiyatu kūṟiyatu
   164. aṭakkam aṉṟituki ṭakka emmuṭaiya
   ammai vāḻkaeṉa vemmaipāra!
   kaṭakkam aṉṟapayaṉ veṉṟu veṉṟikoḷ
   kaḷappe rumparaṇi iṉṟupār.
   kutirai, vīrar ,yāṉaippōr kāṭṭiya intiracālam kūṟiyatu
   165. tuñci vīḻturaka rāci pār! uṭal
   tuṇintu vīḻkuṟaitu ṭippapār!
   añci yōṭumata yāṉai pārutira
   āṟu mōṭuvaṉa nūṟupār.
   kuruti veḷḷam kāṭṭiya intiracālam kūṟiyatu
   166. aṟṟa tōḷivaia laippa pār! uvai
   yaṟāta nīḷkuṭarmi tappapār
   iṟṟa tāḷnariyi ḻuppapār! aṭi
   yiḻukku mūḷaiyilva ḻukkalpār!
   niṇakkaḷam kāṭṭiya intiracālam kūṟiyatu
   167. niṇaṅkaḷ pār! niṇama ṇaṅka ṉintaṉa
   nilaṅkaḷ pār! nilama ṭaṅkalum
   piṇaṅkaḷ pār! ivaiki ṭakka nammuṭaiya
   pēya lātacila pēykaḷ pār!
   intiracālam kaṇṭa pēynilai kūṟiyatu
   168. eṉṟa pōtil ivai meyye ṉāuṭa
   ṉirunta pēypataṟi oṉṟaṉ mēl
   oṉṟu kāṉmuṟiya mēlvi ḻuntaṭicil
   uṇṇa eṇṇiveṟu maṇṇiṉmēl
   ituvum atu
   169. viḻuntuko ḻuṅkuru tīppuṉal eṉṟu
   veṟuṅkaimu kantumukantu
   eḻuntuvi ḻuntacai yeṉṟuni lattai
   iruntutu ḻāviṭumē.
   ituvum atu
   170. cuṟṟani ṇattukil peṟṟaṉam eṉṟu
   culāvuve ṟuṅkaiyavē
   aṟṟaku ṟai ttalai yeṉṟuvi cumpai
   atukkume yiṟṟiṉavē.
   ituvum atu
   171. kayiṟṟuṟi yoppator pēyvaṟi tēuṭal
   kauviṉa tokkaviraintu
   eyiṟṟaiya tukkini lattiṭai pēykaḷ
   iraittaṉa mēlviḻavē.
   appēynilai kaṇṭa yōkiṉi iyalpu kūṟiyatu
   172. muṟampala pōlana kaṅkaṇmu ṟintu
   mukañcita ṟāmutukun
   tiṟampivi lāviṟa yōkiṉi mātar
   cirittuvi lāiṟavē.
   pēykaḷ intiracālattai niṟutta moḻintatu kūṟiyatu
   173. akkaṇam āḷuma ṇaṅkiṉai vantaṉai
   ceytuka ṇaṅkaḷelām
   ikkaṇa māḷumi ṉittavir viccai
   eṉakkaivi tirttalumē.
   mutupēy kāḷiyiṭam moḻintatu kūṟiyatu
   174. koṟṟavarkōṉ vāḷapayaṉ aṟiya vāḻuṅ
   kuvalayattōr kalaiyaṉaittuṅ kūṟa āṅkē
   kaṟṟuvantār kaṟṟa avaṉ kāṇu māpōl
   kaṭaipōkak kaṇṭaruḷeṉ kalvi yeṉṟē.
   intiracālam niṟuttiyatu kūṟiyatu
   175. vaṇaṅkutalum kaṇaṅkaḷelām māyap pāvi
   maṭuttemmai maṟucūṭu cuṭuvai yākil
   aṇaṅkaraciṉ āṇaieṉa vaṇaṅkum ippōtu
   avaitavireṅ kivaikaṟṟā yeṉṉa āṅkē.
   mutupēy varalāṟu kūṟiyatu
   176. niṉmuṉivum curakuruviṉ muṉivumañci
   nilaiyariteṉṟu imakiripuk kiruntēṟku oḷavai
   taṉmuṉivu mavaṉmuṉivun tavirka eṉṟu
   cātaṉaman tiraviccai palavun tantē.
   ituvum atu
   177. uṉṉuṭaiya paḻavaṭiyā raṭiyāḷ teyva
   uruttirayō kiṉiyeṉpāḷ uṉakku naṉmai
   iṉṉamuḷa kiṭaippaṉaiṅ kirukka eṉṉa
   yāṉiruntēṉ cilakālam irunta nāḷil.
   --------------

                      8. irāca pārampariyam (178-211)

   karikālaṉ imayattil pulikkuṟi poṟittatu kūṟiyatu
   178. ceṇṭu koṇṭukari kālaṉoru kāliṉ imayac
   cimaya mālvaraiti rittaruḷimīḷa ataṉaip
   paṇṭu niṉṟapaṭi niṟkaitu veṉṟu mutukil
   pāypu likkuṟipoṟittu atuma ṟittapoḻutē.
   nāratar, karikālaṉai aṇuki moḻintatu kūṟiyatu
   179. kāla mummaiyumu ṇarntaruḷu nāra taṉeṉum
   kaṭavuḷ vētamuṉi vantukaṭal cūḻpu viyilniṉ
   pōlu maṉṉaruḷa rallar eṉa vāci pukalāp
   pukalva toṉṟuḷatu kēḷaraca eṉṟu pukalvāṉa
   ituvum atu
   180. paṇṭu pāratame ṉuṅkataipa rāca raṉmakaṉ
   kara veṅkarimu kaṉparuma ruppai yorukaik
   koṇṭu mērucika rattorupu ṟatti leḻutik
   kuvala yampeṟuta vappayaṉu raippa varitāl.
   nāratar, irācapārampariyam kūṟattoṭaṅkiyatu kūṟiyatu
   181. pāratattiṉuḷa vākiyapa vitra kataiyem
   parama ṉaṟcaritai meyppaḻaiya nāṉma ṟaikaḷē
   nērataṟku itaṉai nāṉmoḻiya nīyeḻuti; muṉ
   neṭiya kuṉṟiṉmicai yēyicaiva tāṉa kataikēḷ.
   maṟaiyiṉ iyalpu kūṟiyatu
   182. ataṉmu taṟkaṇvaru mātimutaṉ māya ṉivaṉē
   apra mēyameṉu meypriyama tāka vuṭaṉē
   patamu mippatamva kukkavaru pāta matuvum
   pāta māṉa cila pārpukaḻa vanta vavaiyum.
   ituvum atu
   183. anta muṭpaṭavi rukkumavvi rukkiṉ vaḻiyē
   āki vantatavva rukkamum varukka muḻutum
   vanta vaṭṭakamum oṭṭariya caṅki taikaḷum
   vāymai vētiyarka ṭāmvitiye ṉumva kaiyumē.
   tirumālē apayaṉāvaṉeṉpatu kūṟiyatu
   184. kamala yōṉimuta lākavarumuṅkaṇ marapiṟ
   kāvaṉ maṉṉavarka ḷākivaru kiṉṟa muṟaiyāl
   amala vētamitu kāṇumiti lāra ṇanilattu
   amala ṉēyapaya ṉākaaṟi keṉṟa ruḷiyē.
   nāratar, irācapārampariyam kūṟicceṉṟatu kūṟiyatu
   185. araṇi vēḷviyila kappaṭuma kaṇṭa vuruvāy
   arava ṇaittuyilu mātimu talāka apayaṉ
   taraṇi kāvalaḷa vuñcelamo ḻintu muṉivaṉ
   tāṉe ḻuntaruḷa māmuṉimo ḻinta paṭiyē.
   tirumāl, nāṉmukaṉ, marīci, kācipaṉ, ñāyiṟu
   vaḻimuṟai kūṟiyatu
   186. āti mālamala nāpikama lattu ayaṉutittu
   ayaṉma rīciyeṉu maṇṇalaiya ḷitta paricum
   kātal kūrtaruma rīcimaka ṉāki vaḷarum
   kāci paṉkatir arukkaṉaiya ḷitta paricum
   maṉu, ikkuvāku ciṟappuk kūṟiyatu
   187. avva rukkaṉmaka ṉākimaṉu mēti ṉipurantu
   ariya kātalaṉai āviṉatu kaṉṟu nikareṉṟu
   evva rukkamumvi yappamuṟai ceyta paricum,
   ikku vākuivaṉ maintaṉeṉa vanta paricum.
   kakuttaṉ ciṟappuk kūṟiyatu
   188. ikku vākuviṉma kaṉputalva ṉāṉa uravōṉ
   ikalu vōṉ ikalu rañceytupu ranta raṉeṉum
   cakku vāyiramu ṭaikkaḷiṟu vākaṉameṉat
   tāṉi runtuporu tāṉavarai veṉṟa cayamum.
   māntātā, mucukuntaṉ ciṟappuk kūṟiyatu
   189. orutu ṟaippuṉalci ṉappuliyum māṉumuṭaṉē
   uṇṇa vaittavura vōṉulakil vaitta aruḷum
   porutu ṟaittalaipu kuntumucu kuntaṉ imaiyōr
   purama ṭaṅkaluma raṇceytupu ranta pukaḻum.
   pirutulāṭcaṉ, cipic ciṟappuk kūṟiyatu
   190. kaṭalka lakkaveḻu miṉṉamutu taṉṉai yoruvaṉ
   kaṭavuḷ vāṉavarka ḷuṇṇa aruḷ ceytakataiyum
   uṭalka lakkaṟaa rintutacai yiṭṭum oruvaṉ
   orutu laippuṟavoṭu okkaniṟai pukka pukaḻum.
   curātirācaṉ, irācakēcari, parakēcari ciṟappuk kūṟiyatu
   191. curāti rācaṉmuta lākavaru cōḻaṉ muṉanāḷ
   cōḻa maṇṭala mamaittapiṟa kēḻulakaiyum
   irāca kēcaripu rantupara kēca rikaḷām
   iruva rāṇaipuli yāṇaiyeṉa niṉṟa pukaḻum.
   kiḷḷivaḷavaṉ, kavēraṉ irācēntiramirutyucittuciṟappuk kūṟiyatu
   192. kāla ṉukkituva ḻutkeṉavu raitta vavaṉum
   kāvi rippuṉalko ṇarntavava ṉumpu vaṉiyiṉ
   mēla ṉaittuyirum vīvatilai yāka namaṉmēl
   veṉṟi koṇṭavaṉu meṉṟivarkaḷ koṇṭaviṟalum.
   cittiraṉ, camuttiracittu pañcapaṉ mutaliyōrciṟappuk kūṟiyatu
   193. puliye ṉakkoṭiyi lintiraṉai vaitta vavaṉum
   puṇari yoṉṟiṉiṭai yoṉṟupuka viṭṭavavaṉum
   valiyi ṉiṟkuruti uṇkeṉava ḷitta vavaṉum
   vāta rācaṉaiva lintupaṇi koṇṭa vavaṉum
   tūṅkeyil eṟintōṉ, uparicaraṉ mutaliyōrciṟappuk kūṟiyatu
   194 tūṅku mūṉṟeyi leṟintavava ṉunti raṇmaṇic
   cuṭarvi māṉamatu vāṉmicaiyu yartta vavaṉum
   tāṅkaḷ pāratamu ṭippaḷavuniṉṟu tarumaṉ
   taṉka ṭaṟpaṭaita ṉakkutavi ceyta vavaṉum.
   kiḷḷivaḷavaṉ, ceṅkaṇāṉ ciṟappuk kūṟiyatu
   195. taḷava ḻikkunakai vēlviḻipi lattiṉ vaḻiyē
   taṉina ṭanturakar taṅkaṇmaṇi koṇṭa vavaṉum
   kaḷava ḻikkavitai poykaiyurai ceyya utiyaṉ
   kālva ḻittaḷaiyai veṭṭiyara ciṭṭa vavaṉum.
   karikālaṉ, cērapāṇṭiyarkaḷai veṉṟatu kūṟiyatu
   196. eṉṟu maṟṟavarkaḷ taṅkaḷcari taṅkaḷ palavum
   eḻuti mīḷaitaṉ mēlvaḻuti cēraṉ maṭiyat
   taṉta ṉikkaḷiṟa ṇaintaruḷi vīra makaḷtaṉ
   taṉata ṭaṅkaḷoṭu taṉpuyama ṇainta paricum.
   karikālaṉ, piratāparuttiraṉ kaṇkoṇṭatu kūṟiyatu
   197. toḻutu maṉṉarē karaicey poṉṉiyil
   toṭara vantilā mukari yaippaṭattu
   eḻutu keṉṟukaṇ ṭitumi kaikkaṇeṉṟu
   iṅka ḻikkavē aṅka ḻintatum,
   karikālaṉ, paṭṭiṉappālai koṇṭatu kūṟiyatu
   198 tattu nīrvarāl kurumi veṉṟatun
   taḻuvu centamiḻp paricil vāṇarpoṉ
   patto ṭāṟunū ṟāyi rampeṟap
   paṇṭu paṭṭiṉap pālai koṇṭatum,
   karikālaṉ, cēra pāṇṭiyarai māṉakkēṭu ceytatu kūṟiyatu
   199 oruvar muṉṉōrnāḷ tantu piṉcelā
   utiyar maṉṉarē maturai maṉṉareṉṟu
   iruvar tammaiyum kiḻikaḷ cuṟṟu vittu
   erivi viḷakkuvaittu ikalvi ḷaittatum.
   parāntakaṉ ciṟappuk kūṟiyatu
   200. vēḻa moṉṟukaittu āli viṇṇiṉvāy
   vicaiya ṭaṅkavum acaiya veṉṟatum
   īḻa muntamiḻk kūṭa luñcitaintu
   ikal kaṭantōr icai parantatum,
   irācarācacōḻaṉ ciṟappuk kūṟiyatu
   201. cataya nāḷviḻā utiyar maṇṭalam
   taṉṉil vaittavaṉ taṉiyor māviṉmēl
   utaya pāṉuvottu utakai veṉṟakōṉ
   orukai vāraṇam palaka varntatum,
   irācēntira cōḻaṉ ciṟappuk kūṟiyatu
   202. kaḷiṟu kaṅkainī ruṇṇa maṇṇaiyil
   kāyci ṉattoṭē kalavu cempiyaṉ
   kuḷiṟu teṇṭiraik kuraika ṭāramum
   koṇṭu maṇṭalam kuṭaiyuḷ vaittatum,
   irācātirācaṉ ciṟappuk kūṟiyatu
   203. kampi liccayat tampa naṭṭatum
   kaṭiya raṇkoḷkal yāṇar kaṭṭaṟak
   kimpu rippaṇaik kiriyu kaittavaṉ
   kirika ḷeṭṭiṉum pulipo ṟittatum
   irācēntiratēvaṉ ciṟappuk kūṟiyatu
   204. oruka ḷiṟṟiṉmēl varuka ḷiṟṟaiyottu
   ulaku yakkoḷap porutu koppaiyiṟ
   poruka ḷattilē muṭika vittavaṉ
   puvika vippatōr kuṭaika vittatum.
   irācamakēntiraṉ ciṟappuk kūṟiyatu
   205. paṉuvalukku mutalāya vēta nāṉkil
   paṇṭuraitta neṟiputukkip paḻaiyar taṅkaṇ
   maṉuvi ṉukku mummaṭi nāṉ maṭiyāñ cōḻaṉ
   matikkuṭaikkī ḻaṟantaḷirppa vaḷarnta vāṟum,
   mutaṟkulōttuṅkaṉ tōṟṟam kūṟiyatu
   206. kuntaḷaraik kūṭaṟcaṅ kamattuveṉṟa
   kōṉapayaṉ kuvalayaṅkāt taḷitta piṉṉai
   intanilak kulappāvai ivaṉpāṟ cēra
   eṉṉa tavañ ceytiruntāḷ eṉṉat tōṉṟi.
   kulōttuṅkaṉ veṟṟic ciṟappuk kūṟiyatu
   207. evvaḷavu tiripuvaṉa muḷavāyt tōṉṟum
   evvaḷavu kulamaṟaika ḷuḷavāy niṟkum
   avvaḷavu tikirivarai yaḷavuñ ceṅkōl
   āṇaicella vapayaṉ kāt taḷikku māṟum.
   karikālaṉ imayattil eḻuti muṭittatu kūṟiyatu
   208. ippu ṟattimaya mālvaraiyiṉ mārpi ṉakalattu
   eḻuti ṉāṉeḻutu taṟkariya vēta meḻuti
   oppu ṟattaṉatu toṉmarapu mamma rapiṉmēl
   uraicey palpukaḻumoṉ ṟumoḻi yātaparicē.
   mutupēy colli muṭittatum kāḷi viyantatum kūṟiyatu
   209. eḻuti maṟṟuraicey tavaravarkaḷ ceypi ḻaiyelām
   emarpo ṟukkaeṉa vippaṭimu ṭitta itaṉait
   toḻutu kaṟṟaṉam eṉattoḻutu collu maḷavil
   cōḻa vamcamitu coṉṉa aṟiveṉṉa vaḻakō?
   kāḷi kulōttuṅkaṉai niṉaintu makiḻtal kūṟiyatu
   210. vaiyakamāṅ kulamaṭantai maṉṉapayaṉ
   taṉṉuṭaiya marapu kēṭṭē
   aiyaṉaiyāṉ peṟṟeṭutta appoḻutum
   ippoḻutot tirunta tillai.
   kāḷi kulōttuṅkaṉaip pukaḻtal
   211. ulakaiyelāṅ kavikkiṉṟa orukavikaic
   cayatuṅkaṉ marapu kīrtti
   alakaiyelāṅ kākkiṉṟa ammaipū
   talaṅkāppāṉ avaṉē yeṉṉa.
   --------------

                      9. pēy muṟaippāṭu (212-231)

   pēykaḷ kāḷiyiṭam tam mikupaci moḻintatu kūṟiyatu
   212. āṟuṭaiya tirumuṭiyā ṉaruḷuṭaiya
   peruntēvi apayaṉ kākkum
   pēṟuṭaiya pūtamāp piṟavāmal
   pēykaḷāp piṟantu keṭṭēm.
   ituvum atu
   213. ārkāppā reṅkaḷainī yaṟintaruḷik
   kāppatallāl aṭaiyap pāḻām
   ūrkākka matilvēṇṭā uyirkātta
   uṭampiṉaiviṭ ṭōṭip pōtum.
   ituvum atu
   214. ōykiṉṟēm ōyvukku miṉiyāṟṟēm
   orunāḷaik korunāḷ nāṅkaḷ
   tēykiṉṟa paṭitēyntu miṭukkaṟṟēm
   ceṟṟālum uyya māṭṭōm.
   ituvum atu
   215 vēkaikku viṟakāṉēm meliyā niṉṟēm
   melintavuṭal taṭippataṟku virakum kāṇēm
   cākaikkit taṉaiyācai pōtum pāḻiṟ
   cākkāṭum aritākat tantu vaittāy.
   ituvum atu
   216 cāvattāṟ peṟutumō catumukaṉṟāṉ
   kīḻnāṅkaḷ mēṉāṭ ceyta
   pāvattā lemvayiṟṟiṟ paciyait vaittāṉ
   pāviyēm pacikkoṉṟu illēm.
   ituvum atu
   217 pataṭikaḷāyk kāṟṟaṭippa nilaini lāmaṟ
   paṟakkiṉṟēm pacikkalaintu pāti nākkum
   utaṭukaḷiṟ pātiyuntiṉ ṟoṟuvā yāṉēm
   uṉakkaṭimai yaṭiyēmai yōṭap pārāy.
   ituvum atu
   218 akaḷaṅkaṉ namakkiraṅkāṉ aracariṭun
   tiṟaikkaruḷvāṉ avaṉṟaṉ yāṉai
   nikaḷampūṇ ṭaṉavaṭiyēm neṭumpaciyāṉ
   aṟavularntu neṟṟāy aṟṟēm.
   ituvum atu
   219 mūkkarukē vaḻunāṟi muṭaināṟi
   utaṭukaḷun tuṭippa vāyai
   īkkatuvum kuṟiyāluyn tirukkiṉṟēm
   aṉṟākil iṉṟē cātum
   mutupēy kaliṅkattukkaṇṭa tīnimittam moḻiyat toṭaṅkiyatu
   220. eṉṟupala kūḷikaḷ
   iraitturaicey pōtattu
   aṉṟimaya veṟpiṉiṭai
   niṉṟuvarum appēy.
   ituvum atu
   221. kaitoḻuti ṟaiñci aṭipa
   yēṉvaṭaka liṅkattu
   eytiyavi ṭattuḷa
   nimittamivai kēṇmō.
   ituvum atu
   222. matakkari maruppiṟa matampularu mālō
   maṭappiṭi maruṭpeḻa matampoḻiyu mālō
   katirccuṭar viḷakkoḷi kaṟutteriyu mālō
   kālamukil ceṅkuruti kālavaru mālō.
   ituvum atu
   223 vārmuraci runtuvaṟi tēatiru mālō
   vantiravil intiravil vāṉiliṭu mālō
   ūrmaṉaiyil ūmaṉeḻa ōriyaḻu mālō
   ōmaveri īmaveri pōlkamaḻu mālō .
   ituvum atu
   224 pūviriyu mālaikaḷ pulālkamaḻu mālō
   poṉceymaṇa mālaioḷi pōyoḻiyu mālō
   ōviyame lāmuṭal viyarppavaru mālō
   ūṟupuṉal ceṅkuruti nāṟavaru mālō .
   kēṭṭa kāḷi moḻiyat toṭaṅkiyatu
   225 eṉāvuraimu ṭittataṉai
   eṉkolviḷai veṉṟē
   viṉāvuraita ṉakketir
   viḷampiṉa ḷaṇaṅkē .
   ituvum atu
   226 uṅkaḷ kuṟiyum vaṭakaliṅkat
   tuḷḷa kuṟiyum umakkaḻakē
   nāṅkaḷ kaṇitap pēykūṟum
   naṉavum kaṉavum colluvōm.
   kāḷi moḻintatu
   227 niruparaṇi veṉṟa akaḷaṅkaṉmata
   yāṉainika ḷaṅkaḷoṭu niṟpaṉa vataṟku
   oruparaṇi yuṇṭeṉavu raittaṉa
   uraippaṭi umakkitu kiṭaikku meṉavē.
   paraṇi uṇṭeṉak kēṭṭa pēynilai
   228 taṭittaṉame ṉattalaita ṭittaṉameṉappala
   taṉippaṉaiku ṉippa veṉavē
   naṭittaṉana ṭippavali yaṟṟaṉako ṭiṟṟaiyu
   naṉaittaṉau taṭṭi ṉuṭaṉē.
   ituvum atu
   229 vilakkukavi lakkukavi ḷaittaṉa eṉakkaḷi
   viḷaittaṉa iḷaitta ṉavilā
   alakkukaa lakkukaa ṭikkaṭici rittaṉa
   ayarttaṉapa citta paciyē.
   ituvum atu
   230 āṭiyirait teḻukaṇaṅkaḷ
   aṇaṅkēyik kaliṅkakkūḻ
   kūṭiyirait tuṇṭuḻiyem
   kūṭārap pōtumō.
   kāḷi pēykaṭku moḻintatu
   231 pōtumpō tāteṉavē
   puṭaippaṭala miṭavēṇṭā
   ōtañcū ḻilaṅkaippōrkku
   oṭṭiraṭṭi kaliṅkappōr.
   --------------

                           10. avatāram (232-311)

   kāḷi, pēykaḷukkut tirumālē kulōttuṅkaṉākap
   piṟantāṉeṉa moḻintamai
   232 aṉṟilaṅkai porutaḻitta avaṉē ap
   pāratappōr muṭittup piṉṉai
   veṉṟilaṅku katirāḻi vicayataraṉ
   eṉautittāṉ viḷampak kēṇmiṉ!
   tirumāl kaṇṇaṉākap piṟantatu
   233 tēvarelāṅ kuṟaiyirappat tēvakitaṉ
   tirivayiṟṟil vacutē vaṟku
   mūvulakun toḻaneṭumāl muṉṉorunāḷ
   avatārañ ceyta piṉṉai.
   kaṇṇaṉ kulōttuṅkaṉākap piṟantatu
   234 iruḷmuḻutu makaṟṟumvitu kulattōṉ tēvi
   ikalviḷaṅku tapaṉakulat tirāca rācaṉ
   aruḷ tiruviṉ tiruvayiṟṟil vantu tōṉṟi
   ālilaiyi ṉavatarittā ṉavaṉē mīḷa.
   kulōttuṅkaṉ piṟanta ciṟappu
   235 vantaruḷi avatārañ ceytalunam
   maṇṇulakum maṟaikaḷ nāṉkum
   antaranīṅ kiṉaeṉṉa antaratun
   tumimuḻaṅki yeḻunta tāṅkē.
   kulōttuṅkaṉaip pāṭṭiyār kaṇṭu makiḻntatu
   236 alarmaḻaipōl maḻaipoḻiya atukaṇṭu
   kaṅkaikoṇṭa cōḻaṉ tēvi
   kulamakaḷtaṉ kulamakaṉaik kōkaṉata
   malarkkaiyāṉ eṭuttuk koṇṭē.
   pāṭṭiyār moḻintatu
   237. avaṉiparkkup purantaraṉu aṭaiyāḷam
   avayavattiṉ aṭaivē nōkki
   ivaṉemakku makaṉāki iravikulam
   pārikkat takuvaṉ eṉṟē.
   irukulattōrum makiḻntatu
   238. tiṅkaḷiṉi ḷaṅkuḻavi cemmaliva ṉeṉṟuñ
   ceyyapari tikkuḻavi aiyaṉiva ṉeṉṟun
   taṅkaḷiṉma kiḻntiruku lattaracar tāmun
   taṉittaṉi uvappator tavappayaṉu mottē.
   aimpaṭaittāli aṇintamai
   239. paṇṭuvacu tēvaṉmaka ṉākinila mātiṉ
   paṭarkaḷaiyum māyaṉiva ṉeṉṟuteḷi veytat
   taṇṭutaṉu vāḷpaṇilam nēmiyeṉu nāmat
   taṉpaṭaika ḷāṉatiru aimpaṭaita rittē.
   kulōttuṅkaṉ naṭaipayiṉṟamai
   240. ciṉappuliva ḷarppator ciṟuppuliyu mottē
   ticaikkaḷiṟa ṇaippator taṉikkaḷiṟu mottē
   aṉaittaṟamum okkaaṭi vaikkaaṭi vaittē
   aṟattoṭuma ṟattuṟai naṭakkanaṭai kaṟṟē.
   maḻalai moḻintatu
   241. tāyartaru pālmulai curakkavaru nāḷē
   tāṉumula kattavar tamakkaruḷ curantē
   tūyamaṉu vuñcuruti yumporuḷ viḷaṅkic
   coṟkaṭe riyattaṉatu coṟkaṭeri vittē.
   pūṇūl aṇintamai
   242. tirumārpiṉ malarmaṭantai tirukkaḻuttiṉ
   maṅkalanā ṇeṉṉa munnūṟ
   perumārpiṉ vantoḷirap piṟappiraṇṭā
   vatupiṟantu ciṟanta piṉṉar.
   maṟai payiṉṟamai
   .243. pōtaṅkoḷ māṇuruvāyp puviyiranta
   aññāṉṟu pukaṉṟu ceṉṟa
   vētaṅkaḷ nāṉkiṉaiyum vētiyarpāl
   kēṭṭaruḷi mīṇṭu kaṟṟē.
   uṭaivāḷ ēntal
   244. niṟaivāḻvaip peṟaltamakkum aṇitteṉṟu
   nilappāvai kaḷippa vintat
   tuṟaivāḷaip puyattirutti uṭaivāḷait
   tiruvaraiyiṉ oḷira vaittē.
   yāṉaiyēṟṟam
   245. īriruma ruppuṭaiya vāraṇam ukaittē
   intiraṉe tirntavarai veṉṟuvaru mēyāṉ
   ōriruma ruppuṭaiya vāraṇam ukaittē
   oṉṉalarai velvaṉeṉa aṉṉatupa yiṉṟē.
   kutiraiyēṟṟam
   246. iṟṟaivarai yuñcela varukkaṉoru nāḷpōl
   ēḻpariyu kaittiru ḷakaṟṟivaru mēyāṉ
   oṟṟaivaya māṉaṭavi ittaraiva ḷākattu
   uṟṟaviruḷ tīrppaṉeṉa maṟṟatupa yiṉṟē.
   paṭaikkalap payiṟci
   247. cakkaramu taṟpaṭaiyo raintumuta ṉāḷē
   taṉṉuṭaiya āṉavata ṉālavai namakkut
   tikkuvica yattiṉvaru meṉṟavai payiṟṟic
   ceṅkaimalar nontila cumantila taṉakkē.
   kalainūṟ payiṟci
   248. uraiceypala kalvikaḷiṉurimaipala
   colluvateṉ uvamaiyurai ceyyiṉ ulakattu
   aracaruḷa rallareṉa avaipukaḻa
   malkukalai avaiyavaikaḷ valla piṟakē.
   iḷavaracāṉamai
   249. icaiyuṭaṉe ṭuttakoṭi apayaṉava
   ṉikkivaṉai iḷavaracil vaitta piṟakē
   ticaiyaraca rukkuriya tiruviṉai
   mukappatoru tiruvuḷama ṭuttaruḷiyē.
   pōrmēṟ ceṉṟamai
   250. vaḷarvator patattiṉiṭai matakari
   mukattiṉiṭai vaḷaiyukir maṭuttu viḷaiyāṭu
   iḷavariye ṉappakaiñar etirmuṉaika
   ḷaikkiḻiya eṟipaṭai piṭitta ruḷiyē.
   vaṭavaracarai veṟṟikoṇṭatu
   251. kuṭaticai pukakkaṭavu kurakatara
   tantiravi kuṟukalum eṟikku miruḷpōl
   vaṭaticai mukattaracar varukatamu
   kattaṉatu kurakatam ukaitta ruḷiyē.
   vayirākaram erimaṭuttatu
   252. puramerima ṭuttapoḻutu atuvitu
   veṉattikiri pukaiyeriku vippa vayirā
   karamerima ṭuttaracar karametir
   kuvippatoru kaṭavaraita ṉaikka ṭaviyē,
   kaḷaṅkoṇṭatu
   253. kuḷamutira mettiyator kuraikaṭal
   kaṭuppaetir kuṟukalarkaḷ viṭṭa kutirait
   taḷamutira veṭṭi oru cerumutira
   oṭṭiṉarkaḷ talaimalaiku vitta ruḷiyē.
   cakkarak kōṭṭam aḻittamai
   254. maṉukkōṭṭam aḻittapirāṉ
   vaḷavarpirāṉ tiruppuruvat
   taṉukkōṭṭa namaṉkōṭṭam
   paṭṭatucak karakkōṭṭam.
   kulōttuṅkaṉ viḷakkamum pakaivar aḻivum
   255. carika ḷantoṟun taṅkaḷca yamakaḷ
   taṉṉai maṉṉapa yaṉkaip piṭittalum
   parika ḷuṅkaḷi ṟuntaṉa rāciyum
   pāri pōkaṅko ṭuttaṉar pārttipar.
   ituvum atu
   256. poruta rātipar kaṇkaḷ civantila
   pōri lōṭiya kālkaḷ civantaṉa
   viruta rāca payaṅkaraṉ ceṅkaiyil
   vēlci vantatu kīrtti veḷuttatē.
   vīrarācēntiraṉ iṟantamai
   257. māvukait torutaṉi apayaṉ ippaṭi
   vaṭaticai mēṟcela maṉṉar maṉṉavaṉ
   tēvaruk karacaṉāy vicumpiṉ mēṟcelat
   teṉṟicaik kuppukun taṉmai ceppuvām.
   cōḻanāṭu araciḻanta iyal
   258. maṟaiyavar vēḷvi kuṉṟi
   maṉuneṟi yaṉaittum māṟit
   tuṟaikaḷō rāṟum māṟic
   curutiyum muḻakkam ōyntē.
   ituvum atu
   259. cātika ḷoṉṟō ṭoṉṟu
   talaitaṭu māṟi yārum
   ōtiya neṟiyi ṉillātu
   oḻukkamum maṟantu pōyē.
   ituvum atu
   260. oruvarai yoruvar kaimmikku
   umpartaṅ kōyil cōmpi
   arivaiyar kaṟpiṉ māṟi
   araṇkaḷu maḻiya āṅkē,
   kulōttuṅkaṉ cōḻanāṭu eytiyamai
   261. kaliyiruḷ paranta kālaik
   kaliyiruḷ karakkat tōṉṟum
   olikaṭal arukka ṉeṉṉa
   ulakuyya vantu tōṉṟi,
   nāṭṭai nilaipeṟuttiyatu
   262. kāppelām uṭaiya tāṉē
   paṭaippatum kaṭaṉāk koṇṭu
   kōppelām kulaintōr tammaik
   kuṟiyilē niṟutti vaittē,
   kulōttuṅkaṉ maṅkalanīrāṭiyatu
   263. viripuṉal vēlai nāṉkum
   vētaṅkaḷ nāṉku mārppat
   tiripuva ṉaṅkaḷ vāḻttat
   tiruapi ṭēkañ ceytē,
   maṟaiyavar muṭicūṭṭiyatu
   264. aṟaikaḻalaraca rappoḻutu
   aṭimicai yaṟuke ṭuttiṭa
   maṟaiyavar muṭiye ṭuttaṉar
   maṉuneṟi talaiye ṭukkavē.
   muṭipuṉai nīr āṭṭutal
   265. niraimaṇi palaku yiṟṟiya
   neṭumuṭi micaivi tippaṭi
   coripuṉa liṭaimu ṉaittaṉa
   tuṟaikaḷiṉ aṟama ṉaittumē.
   pulikkoṭi eṭuttamai
   266. potuvaṟa vulaku kaikkoṭu
   pulivaḷar koṭiye ṭuttaṉa
   atumutaṟ koṭiye ṭuttalum
   amarartam viḻave ṭukkavē.
   koṟṟakkuṭai kavittamai
   267. kuvikaiko ṭaracar cuṟṟiya
   kuraikaḻal apayaṉ muttaṇi
   kavikaiyiṉ nilave ṟittatu
   kaliyeṉu miruḷo ḷittatē.
   ituvum atu
   268. araṉuṟai yumpaṭi malaikaḷ
   aṭaiyavi ḷaṅkiṉa aṉaiyōṉ
   orutaṉi veṇkuṭai ulakil
   oḷikoḷ nalantaru niḻalil.
   kulōttuṅkaṉ pukaḻ mēmpāṭu
   269. arituyi lumpaṭi kaṭalkaḷ
   aṭaiyavi ḷaṅkiṉa kaviṉiṉ
   orukaru veṅkali kaḻuvi
   ulavupe rumpukaḻ nilavil.
   ituvum atu
   270. niḻalila ṭaintaṉa ticaikaḷ
   neṟiyila ṭaintaṉa maṟaikaḷ
   kaḻalila ṭaintaṉar utiyar
   kaṭalila ṭaintaṉar ceḻiyar.
   ituvum atu
   271. karuṇaiyo ṭuntaṉa tupaya
   karamuta vum poruḷ maḻaiyiṉ
   araṇiya mantira vaṉalkaḷ
   avaiyuta vumperu maḻaiyē.
   ituvum atu
   272. paricil cumantaṉa kavikaḷ
   pakaṭucu mantaṉa tiṟaikaḷ
   aracu cumantaṉa iṟaikaḷ
   avaṉi cumantaṉa puyamum.
   ituvum atu
   273. viritta vāḷukirvi ḻitta ḻaṟpuliyai
   mītu vaikkaima yattiṉait
   tiritta kōlilvaḷai vuṇṭu nītipuri
   ceyya kōlilvaḷai villaiyē.
   ituvum atu
   274. kataṅka ḷiṟporuti ṟaiñci ṭāvaracar
   kālka ḷiltaḷaiyu nūlkaḷiṉ
   pataṅka ḷiltaḷaiyu maṉṟi vēṟoru
   pataṅka ḷiltaḷaika ḷillaiyē.
   ituvum atu
   275. meṉka lāpamaṭa vārkaḷ cīṟaṭi
   micaicci lampolivi ḷaippatōr
   iṉka lāmviḷaiva taṉṟi eṅkumor
   ikalka lāmviḷaiva tillaiyē.
   kulōttuṅkaṉ poḻutu pōkku
   276. varuceruvoṉ ṟiṉmaiyiṉāṉ maṟpōruñ
   coṟpulavōr vātap pōrum
   iruciṟaivā raṇappōrum ikaṉmatavā
   raṇappōrum iṉaiya kaṇṭē,
   ituvum atu
   277. kalaiyiṉoṭum kalaivāṇar kaviyiṉoṭum
   icaiyiṉoṭum kātal mātar
   mulaiyiṉoṭum maṉunīti muṟaiyiṉoṭum
   maṟaiyiṉoṭum poḻutu pōkki,
   kulōttuṅkaṉ parivēṭṭai yāṭap puṟappaṭa niṉaintatu
   278. kālāṟṟaṇ ṭalaiyuḻakkum kāviriyiṉ
   karaimaruṅku vēṭṭai yāṭip
   pālāṟṟaṅ karaimaruṅku parivēṭṭai
   āṭutaṟkup payaṇa meṉṟē,
   nālvakaic cēṉaikaḷum tiraṇṭamai
   279. muracaṟaikeṉ ṟaruḷutalum muḻutulakum
   orunakaruṭ pukunta toppat
   tiraiceykaṭal oliyaṭaṅkat ticaināṉkiṉ
   paṭaināṉkum tiraṇṭa āṅkē.
   kulōttuṅkaṉ puṟappāṭu
   280. aḻakiṉmē laḻakupeṟa aṇiyaṉaittum
   aṇintaruḷik kaṇita nūliṟ
   paḻakiṉār terinturaitta paḻutaṟunāṭ
   paḻutaṟṟa poḻutattu āṅkē.
   ituvum atu
   281. aṉaka tāṉamaṟai vāṇarpalar niṉṟu peṟavē
   apaya tāṉamapa yampukutu maṉṉar peṟavē
   kaṉaka tāṉammuṟai niṉṟukavi vāṇar peṟavē
   karaṭa tāṉammata vāraṇamu maṉṟupeṟavē.
   yāṉai mēṟkoṇṭatu
   282. maṟṟa veṅkaṭa kaḷiṟṟiṉ utayakki riyiṉmēl
   matika vittiṭa utittiṭum arukka ṉeṉavē
   koṟṟa veṇkuṭaika vippamicaikoṇṭu kavarik
   kulama tippuṭaika vittanila vottu varavē.
   palvakai iyaṅkaḷiṉ muḻakkoli
   283. oruva lampuri taḻaṅkoli muḻaṅki yeḻavē
   uṭaṉmu ḻaṅkupaṇi lampala muḻaṅki yeḻavē
   paruvam vantupala koṇṭalkaṇ muḻaṅki yeḻavē
   palavi taṅkaḷoṭu palliya muḻaṅki yeḻavē.
   piṟapala oli muḻakkam
   284. maṉṉar cīrcaya mikuttiṭai viṭāta voliyum
   maṟaiva lāḷarmaṟai nāḷvayiṉ vaḻātavoliyum
   iṉṉa mākaṭaṉ muḻaṅkieḻu kiṉṟa voliyeṉṟu
   impar umparaṟi yātapari ceṅku mikavē.
   ēḻicai vallapi uṭaṉiruntamai
   285. vāḻi cōḻakula cēkaraṉ vakutta icaiyiṉ
   matura vāriyeṉa lākumicai māta riteṉā
   ēḻu pārulako ṭēḻicai vaḷarkka vuriyāḷ
   yāṉai mītupiri yātuṭa ṉiruntu varavē.
   tiyākavalli uṭaṉ ceṉṟamai
   286. poṉṉiṉ mālaimalar mālaipaṇi māṟi uṭaṉē
   puvaṉi kāvalarkaḷ tēviyarkaḷ cūḻpi ṭivarac
   ceṉṉi yāṇaiyuṭaṉ āṇaiyaina ṭattum urimait
   tiyāka valliniṟai celviuṭaṉ malki varavē.
   aracarum peṇkaḷum cūḻntu vantamai
   287. piṭiyiṉ mēlvaru piṭikkula manēka meṉavē
   peyva ḷaikkaimaṭa mātarpiṭi mītiṉ varavē
   muṭiyiṉ mēṉmuṭi niraittuvaru kiṉṟa teṉavē
   muṟaicey maṉṉavarkaḷ poṟkuṭai kavittuvaravē.
   aracarōṭu vīrar cūḻntu vantamai
   288. yāṉai mītuvarum yāṉaiyu manēka meṉavē
   aṭuka ḷiṟṟiṉmicai koṇṭara canēkam varavē
   cēṉai mītumoru cēṉaivaru kiṉṟa teṉavē
   teḷipa ṭaikkala ṉilāvoḷi paṭaittu varavē.
   muracu muḻakkum koṭi varicaiyum
   289. mukiliṉ mēṉmukil muḻaṅkivaru kiṉṟa teṉavē
   mūri yāṉaikaḷiṉ mēṉmura catirntu varavē
   tukiliṉ mēlvaru tukiṟkulamu mokku meṉavē
   tōkai nīḷkoṭikaḷ mēṉmuki ṟoṭaṅki varavē.
   peṇkaḷ tērmītu vantatum puḻuti eḻuntatum
   290. tēriṉ mītuvaru tērkaḷuma nēkam eṉavē
   cempoṉ mēkalai nitampanirai tēriṉ varavē
   pāriṉ mītumoru pāruḷatu pōlum eṉavē
   paṭala tūḷiyu meḻuntiṭaiyiṉ mūṭi varavē.
   cēṉaikaḷiṉ celavu
   291. yāṉai mēliḷam piṭiyiṉ mēṉirait
   tiṭaiya ṟātupōm eṟika ṭaṟkiṇai
   cēṉai mākaṭaṟ kapaya ṉimmuṟaic
   cētu pantaṉam ceyta tokkavē.
   civikaiyum kuṭaiyum ceṉṟa iyalpu
   292. nīla māmaṇic civikai veḷḷamum
   nitti lakkulak kavikai veḷḷamum
   kāli ṉāṉvarum yamuṉai veḷḷamum
   kaṅkai veḷḷamum kāṇmiṉ eṉṉavē.
   koṭikaḷ ceṉṟa iyalpu
   293. keṇṭai mācuṇam uvaṇam vāraṇam
   kēḻal āḷimā mēḻi kōḻivil
   koṇṭa āyiram koṭinu ṭaṅkavē
   kuḷiṟu vempulik koṭiku lāvavē.
   peṇkaḷ kūṭṭam parantatu
   294. toṭaikaḷ kantaram puṭaikoḷ koṅkaikaṇ
   cōti vāṇmukam kōtai yōtimeṉ
   naṭaikaḷ meṉcoleṉṟu aṭaiya voppilā
   nakaima ṇikkoṭit tokaipa rakkavē.
   ituvum atu
   295. eṅkumuḷa meṉkatali yeṅkumuḷa
   taṇkamukam eṅkumuḷa poṅku miḷanīr
   eṅkumuḷa paiṅkumiḻkaḷ eṅkumuḷa
   ceṅkumutam eṅkumuḷa ceṅka yalkaḷē.
   ituvum atu
   296. āṟalaita raṅkamuḷa aṉṉanaṭai
   tāmumuḷa ālaikamaḻ pāku muḷavāy
   vēṟumoru poṉṉivaḷa nāṭucaya
   tuṅkaṉmuṉ vitittatuvum okku meṉavē.
   uṭaṉceṉṟa yāṉaikkūṭṭattiṉ kāṭci
   297. vēḻanirai eṉṟamalai yeṅkumiṭai
   kiṉṟaayil veṉṟiapa yaṉṟa ṉaruḷāl
   vāḻaapa yampukutu cēraṉoṭu
   kūṭamalai nāṭaṭaiya vanta teṉavē.
   ituvum atu
   298. akkiriku laṅkaḷviṭum aṅkuliyiṉ
   nuṇtivalai acceḻiyar añci viṭumat
   tikkiluḷa nittilamu kantukoṭu
   vīciyoru teṉṟalvaru kiṉṟateṉavē.
   kulōttuṅkaṉ tillaik kūttaṉai vaṇaṅkit
   tiruvatikai yaṭaintatu
   299. teṉṟicaiyi ṉiṉṟuvaṭa tikkiṉmukam
   vaittaruḷi mukkaṇuṭai veḷḷi malaiyōṉ
   maṉṟiṉaṭa māṭiyaruḷ koṇṭu viṭai
   koṇṭatikai mānakaruḷ viṭṭa ruḷiyē.
   kulōttuṅkaṉ kacciyaṭaintamai
   300. viṭṭaati kaippatiyi ṉiṉṟupaya
   ṇampayaṇam viṭṭuviḷai yāṭi apayaṉ
   vaṭṭamati ottakuṭai maṉṉartoḻa
   naṇṇiṉaṉva ḷaṅkeḻuvukacci nakarē.
   iṅṅaṉam kūṟum kāḷitiru muṉ kaliṅkattup pōrkaṇṭa pēy vantamai
   301. eṉṉumita naṉmoḻi eṭuttiṟaivi
   colluvataṉ muṉṉamikal kaṇṭa torupēy
   taṉṉuṭaiya kāltaṉatu piṉpaṭa
   maṉattuvakai taḷḷivara ōṭivaravē.
   kaliṅkappōr kaṇṭa pēy moḻintatu
   302. kaliṅkar kuruti kuruti
   kaliṅkam aṭaiya aṭaiya
   melinta vuṭalkaḷ taṭimiṉ
   melinta vuṭalkaḷ taṭimiṉ.
   ituvum atu
   303. uṇaṅkal vayiṟu kuḷira uvantu paruka paruka
   kaṇaṅkaḷ eḻuka eḻuka kaṇaṅkaḷ eḻuka eḻuka.
   ituvum atu
   304. eṉceyap pāvi kāḷiṅ
   kiruppatuaṅ kiruppa muṉṉē
   vaṉciṟaik kaḻukum pāṟum
   vayiṟukaḷ pīṟip pōṉa.
   ituvum atu
   305. vayiṟuka ḷeṉṉiṟ pōtā
   vāykaḷō pōtā paṇṭai
   eyiṟuka ḷeṉṉiṟ pōtā
   eṉṉiṉum īṇṭap pōtum.
   ituvum atu
   306. ciramalai viḻuṅkac cennīrt
   tiraikaṭal parukal ākap
   piramaṉai vēṇṭip piṉṉum
   perumpaci peṟavum vēṇṭum.
   atukēṭṭa maṟṟaip pēykaḷ nilai
   307. eṉṟa vōcai tañcevik
   kicaittalum tacaippiṇam
   tiṉṟa pōṟpa ruttumey
   cirittumēl viḻuntumē.
   ituvum atu
   308. ōkai coṉṉa pēyiṉ vāyai
   ōṭi mutta muṇṇumē
   cākai coṉṉa pēyka ḷaitta
   karkka paṟkaḷ eṉṉumē.
   ituvum atu
   309. piḷḷai vīḻa vīḻa vumpe runtu ṇaṅkai koṭṭumē
   vaḷḷai pāṭi āṭi ōṭi vāve ṉāva ḻaikkumē.
   ituvum atu
   310. eṉāu raitta tēvi vāḻi
   vāḻi yeṉṟu vāḻttiyē
   kaṉāu raitta pēyi ṉaikka
   ḻutti ṉiṟko ṭāṭumē.
   kaliṅkattuppēyaik kāḷi pōrnilai viṉāyatu
   311. āṭivaru pēykaḷiṉ alantalai
   tavirttaṭu paṟantalai yaṟinta taṉiṉiṉ
   ṟōṭivaru pēyaiika luḷḷapaṭi
   colkeṉa vuraittaṉa ḷuraitta ruḷavē.
   -------------

               11. kāḷikkuk kūḷi kūṟiyatu (312- 403)

   kaliṅkappōr uraittaṟkarumai
   312. māvā yiramum paṭakkaliṅkar
   maṭinta kaḷappōr uraippōrkku
   nāvā yiramuṅ kēṭpōrkku
   nāḷā yiramum vēṇṭumāl.
   ituvum atu
   313. oruvark koruvāy koṇṭuraikka
   oṇṇā tēṉum uṇṭākuñ
   ceruvaic ciṟiyēṉ viṇṇappañ
   ceyyac ciṟitu kēṭṭaruḷē.
   kāñciyiṉ ciṟappu
   314. pāre lāmuṭai yāṉapa yaṉkoṭaip
   paṅka yakkaram oppeṉap paṇṭornāḷkāre lāmeḻun
   tēḻarai nāḻikaik kāñca
   ṉampoḻi kāñciya taṉkaṇē.
   kulōttuṅkaṉ taṅkiya māḷikai maṇṭapa iyalpu
   315. ampoṉ mēru vatuko litukoleṉ
   ṟāyi raṅkatir veyyavaṉ aiyuṟum
   cempoṉ māḷikait teṉkuṭa tikkiṉil
   ceyta cittira maṇṭapan taṉṉilē.
   vīṟṟirunta iṭacciṟappu
   316. moytti laṅkiya tārakai vāṉiṉnīḷ
   mukaṭṭe ḻunta muḻumatik koppeṉa
   neytti laṅkiya nittilap pantariṉ
   niṉṟu veṇkuṭai oṉṟu niḻaṟṟavē.
   veṇ koṟṟak kuṭaikkīḻ veṇcāmarai vīca iruntamai
   317. mēṟka vitta matikkuṭai yiṉpuṭai
   vīcu kiṉṟaveṇ cāmarai taṉṟirup
   pāṟka ṭaltirai ōraṇ ṭāṅkiru
   pālum vantu paṇiceyva pōlavē.
   cimmātaṉattil iruntamai
   318. aṅkaṇ ñāla maṉaittum puyattilvait
   tāṭa kakkiri yilpuli vaittavaṉ
   ciṅka ācaṉat tēṟi yiruppatōr
   ciṅka ēṟeṉac cevvi ciṟakkavē.
   vīṟṟirunta ciṟappu
   319. paṇippa ṇattuṟai pārkkoru nāyakaṉ
   palka laittuṟai nāvi liruntavaṉ
   maṇippa ṇippuyat tēciṅka vākaṉi
   vantu centiru māto ṭirukkavē.
   tēviyar uṭaṉ iruntamai
   320. taruma ṭaṅka mukantu taṉampoḻi
   taṉpu yampiri yāccayap pāvaiyum
   tiruma ṭantaiyum pōlperum puṇṇiyam
   ceyta tēviyar cēvitti rukkavē.
   āṭalpāṭal makaḷir cūḻntiruntamai
   321. nāṭa kāti nirutta maṉaittiṉum
   nālva kaipperum paṇṇiṉum eṇṇiya
   āṭal pāṭalarampaiyar okkumav
   vaṇukki māru manēka rirukkavē.
   cūtar, mākatar, maṅkalappāṭakar pukaḻppāṭal
   322. cūtar mākatar ātiya māntarum
   tuyya maṅkalap pāṭakar tāmumniṉ
   pāta mātara rāyavar kaṭkelām
   paimpoṉ mauli eṉappukaḻ pāṭavē.
   icaivallār aruku cūḻntamai
   323. vīṇai yāḻkuḻal taṇṇumai vallavar
   vēṟu vēṟivai nūṟuvi tampaṭak
   kāṇa lāmvakai kaṇṭaṉam nīyiṉik
   kāṇṭal vēṇṭu meṉakkaḻal pōṟṟavē.
   kulōttuṅkaṉ icaippāṭal kēṭṭatum ārāyntu kuṟṟaṅ kaṇṭatum
   324. tāḷa mumcela vumpiḻai yāvakai
   tāṉva kuttaṉa taṉṉetir pāṭiyē
   kāḷa mumkaḷi ṟumpeṟum pāṇartam
   kalvi yilpiḻai kaṇṭaṉaṉ kēṭkavē.
   ciṟṟaracarkaḷ kuṭaipiṭittuc cāmarai vīciyatu
   325. veṅka ḷiṟṟili ḻintapiṉ vantaṭi
   vīḻnta maṉṉavar venniṭu muṉiṭu
   taṅkaḷ poṟkuṭai cāmaram eṉṟivai
   tāṅkaḷ taṅkarat tālpaṇi māṟavē.
   ciṟṟaracar tēvimār cēṭiyarāy iruntamai
   326. teṉṉa rātina rātipa rāṉavar
   tēvi mārkaḷtaṉ cēṭiya rākavē
   maṉṉa rātipaṉ vāṉava rātipaṉ
   vanti runtaṉaṉ eṉṉai rukkavē.
   maṉṉarkaḷ puṟattē irukka, akattē
   amaiccarōṭu iruntamai
   327. maṇṭa līkarum mānila vēntarum
   vantu ṇaṅku kaṭaittalai vaṇṭaimaṉ
   toṇṭai māṉmutal mantirap pārakar
   cūḻntu taṉkaḻal cūṭi irukkavē.
   maṉṉarkaḷ āṇaipeṟṟu uḷpukuntamai
   328. muṟaiyi ṭattiru mantira vōlaiyāḷ
   muṉva ṇaṅki muḻuvatum vēntartam
   tiṟaiyi ṭappuṟa niṉṟaṉar eṉṟalum
   ceykai nōkkivan teyti yirukkavē.
   āṅkuvantu - cūḻnta aracarkaḷ
   329. teṉṉavar villavar kūpakar
   cāpakar cētipar yātavarē
   kaṉṉaṭar pallavar kaitavar
   kāṭavar kāripar kōcalarē.
   ituvum atu
   330. kaṅkar karāḷar kavintar
   tumintar kaṭampar tuḷumparkaḷē
   vaṅkari lāṭarma rāṭar
   virāṭar mayintar cayintarkaḷē.
   331 ciṅkaḷar vaṅkaḷar cēkuṇar
   cēvaṇar ceyyava raiyaṇarē
   koṅkaṇar koṅkarku liṅkar
   cavuntiyar kuccarar kacciyarē.
   332. vattavar mattirar māḷuvar
   mākatar maccar milēccarkaḷē
   kuttarku ṇattar vaṭakkar
   turukkar kurukkar viyattarkaḷē.
   vanta aracar ceykai
   323. ennaka raṅkaḷum nāṭu
   memakkaruḷ ceytaṉai emmaiyiṭac
   coṉṉata ṉaṅkaḷ koṇarntaṉam
   eṉṟaṭi cūṭuka raṅkaḷoṭē.
   iṭṭa tiṟai
   334. āram ivaiivai poṟkalam āṉai ivaiivai oṭṭakam
   āṭal ayamivai maṟṟivai āti muṭiyoṭu peṭṭakam
   īra muṭaiyaṉa nittilam ēṟu navamaṇi kaṭṭiya
   ēka vaṭamivai maṟṟivai yātum vilaiyilpa takkamē.
   ituvum atu
   335. ivaiyum ivaiyumma ṇittiraḷ iṉaiya ivaikaṉa kakkuvai
   iruḷum veyilume ṟittiṭa ilaku maṇimaka rakkuḻai
   uvaiyum uvaiyumi lakkaṇam uṭaiya piṭiivai uṭpaka
   ṭuyarcey koṭiivai maṟṟivai urimai arivaiyar paṭṭamē.
   ituvum atu
   336. ēṟi yaruḷa vaṭukkumin nūṟu kaḷiṟu mivaṟṟetir
   ēṉai yaraca roruttarō rāṉai yiṭuva reṉiṟpuva
   māṟi aruḷa avarkkiṭai yāmum icaivam eṉappala
   māṉa aracar taṉittaṉi vāḻvu karuti uraipparē.
   tiṟaipeṟṟa kulōttuṅkaṉ viṉāyatu
   337. aracar añcaleṉa aṭiyi raṇṭumavar
   muṭiyiṉ vaittaruḷi aracarmaṟ
   ṟuraice yuntiṟaikaḷ oḻiya niṉṟavarum
   uḷarko leṉṟaruḷu poḻutilē.
   viṉāyataṟku maṟumoḻi
   338. kaṭava tantiṟaiko ṭaṭaiya vantaracar
   kaḻalva ṇaṅkiṉarkaḷ ivaruṭaṉ
   vaṭaka liṅkarpati yavaṉi raṇṭuvicai
   varuki laṉtiṟaiko ṭeṉalumē.
   atukēṭṭa kulōttuṅkaṉ nilai
   339. uṟuva teṉkoleṉa nilaiku laintaracar
   uyirna ṭuṅkaoḷir pavaḷavāy
   muṟuval koṇṭaporuḷ aṟiki lamciṟitum
   muṉivu koṇṭatilai vataṉamē.
   kulōttuṅkaṉ iṭṭa kaṭṭaḷai
   340. eḷiyaṉ eṉṟiṭiṉum kuṉṟaraṇam
   iṭiya nampaṭaiñar kaṭituceṉ
   ṟaṉiya lampumata malaikaḷ koṇṭaṇaimiṉ
   avaṉai yuṅkoṇarmiṉ eṉalumē.
   karuṇākarat toṇṭaimāṉ pōrkekaḻuntamai
   341. iṟaimo ḻintaḷavil eḻuka liṅkamavai
   eṟiva ṉeṉṟukaḻal toḻutaṉaṉ
   maṟaimo ḻintapaṭi marapiṉ vantakula
   tilakaṉ vaṇṭainakar aracaṉē.
   toṇṭaimāṉ viṭai koṇṭatu
   342. aṭaiya atticaip pakaitu kaippaṉeṉ
   ṟācai koṇṭaṭal toṇṭaimāṉ
   viṭaiye ṉakkeṉap puliyu yarttavaṉ
   viṭaiko ṭukkaap poḻutilē.
   paṭai tiraṇṭatu
   343. kaṭalka lakkalkol malaiyi ṭittalkol
   kaṭuvi ṭappoṟip paṇapaṇip
   piṭaro ṭittalkol paṭaini ṉaippeṉap
   piraḷa yattiṉil tiraḷavē.
   paṭaiyiṉ muḻakkoli
   344. vaḷaika lippavum muraco lippavum
   marami raṭṭavum vayiramāt
   toḷaiyi caippavum ticaiyi paccevit
   toḷaiya ṭaittalait toṭaravē.
   paṭai nerukkam
   345. kuṭaini raittaliṉ taḻaine rukkaliṉ
   koṭivi rittaliṉ kuḷirca tukkamot
   tiṭaini raittaliṉ pakalka rappavuyt
   tiruni lapparap piruḷpa rakkavē
   ituvum atu
   346. alakil kaṭṭaḻal kaṉalvi rittalāl
   ariya poṟpaṇik kalaṉe ṟittalāl
   ilaku kaippaṭai kaṉalvi rittalāl
   iruḷka rakkavē oḷipa rakkavē.
   ituvum atu
   347. akila veṟpumiṉ ṟāṉai yāṉavō
   aṭaiya mārutam puravi yāṉavō
   mukila ṉaittumat tērka ḷāṉavō
   mūri vēlaipōr vīra rāṉavō.
   ituvum atu
   348. pārci ṟuttaliṟ paṭaipe ruttatō
   paṭaipe ruttaliṟ pārci ṟuttatō
   nērce ṟuttavark karitu niṟpiṭam
   neṭuvi cumpalāl iṭamu millaiyē.
   paṭaiyiṉ ceyal
   349. eṉave ṭutturait tatica yittuniṉ
   ṟiṉaiya maṇṇuḷōr aṉaiya viṇṇuḷōr
   maṉana ṭukkuṟap puṟamma ṟaittavāṉ
   māti raṅkaḷaic cātu raṅkamē.
   yāṉaippaṭaiyiṉ ciṟappu
   350. kaṭalka ḷaiccori malaiyuḷa eṉairu
   kaṭata ṭattiṭai poḻimata muṭaiyaṉa
   kaṉalvi ḷaippaṉa mukiluḷa eṉaviḻi
   kaṉalci ṉattaṉa kariyoṭu parikaḷiṉ.
   uṭalpi ḷappaṉa piṟaicila vuḷaeṉa
   uyarma ruppiṉa ulakukaḷ kulaitara
   urumi ṭippaṉa vaṭavaṉal uḷaveṉa
   olimu kiṟkaṭa karikaḷum miṭaiyavē.
   kutiraip paṭaiyiṉ ciṟappu
   351. muṉaikaḷ oṭṭiṉar muṭiyiṉai yiṭaṟuva
   muṭiyiṉ muttiṉai viḷaipuka ḻeṉanila
   mutukil vittuva nilamuṟu tukaḷaṟa
   mukiṉmi tippaṉa mukilviṭu tuḷiyoṭu
   kaṉaika ṭaṟṟirai niraiyeṉa viraivoṭu
   kaṭali ṭattiṉai valamiṭam varuvaṉa
   kaṭali ṭattiṟum iṭiyeṉa aṭiyiṭu
   kavaṉa mikkaṉa kataḻpari kaṭukavē.
   tērppaṭaiyiṉ ciṟappu
   352. iruni lattiṭar uṭaipaṭu muruḷaṉa
   irupu ṭaic ciṟa kuṭaiyaṉa muṉaipeṟiṉ
   etirpa ṟappaṉa viṭunuka moṭukaṭi
   tivuḷi muṟpaṭiṉ itupari pavameṉum
   oruni ṉaippiṉai uṭaiyaṉa viṉaiyaṉa
   uyarcey moṭṭoṭu malareṉa niṟuviya
   oḻita racceru uṟupuṉal umiḻvaṉa
   ulaka ḷappaṉa iratamum maruviyē.
   kālāṭpaṭaiyiṉ ciṟappu
   353. alakil veṟṟiyum urimaiyu mivaiyeṉa
   avaya vattiṉil eḻutiya aṟikuṟi
   avaiye ṉappala vaṭunirai yuṭaiyavar
   aṭipu ṟakkiṭil amarartam ulakoṭiv
   ulaku kaippaṭum eṉiṉuma toḻipavar
   uṭalna makkoru cumaiyeṉa muṉipavar
   uyirai viṟṟuṟu pukaḻkoḷa uḻalpavar
   oruva roppavar paṭaiñarkaḷ miṭaiyavē.
   vīrariṉ āravāram
   354. viḻitta viḻitaṉi viḻitta virutarkaḷ
   viṭaittu veṭuveṭu cirittavāy
   teḻitta poḻutuṭal timirkka imaiyavar
   tikaikkaṇ matakari tikaikkavē.
   kutiraiyiṉ ceyal
   355. ukattiṉ muṭiviṉil ukaitta kaṉaikaṭal
   uvaṭṭi yeṉamukil mukaṭṭiṉmēl
   nakaitta viṭupari mukakkaṇ nuraicura
   natikkaṇ nuraiyeṉa mitakkavē.
   yāṉaiyiṉ ceyal
   356. kaḻappil veḷilcuḷi katattil irukavuḷ
   kalitta kaṭamiṭi poṟuttapōrk
   kuḻappi varumukil muḻakkil alaikaṭal
   kuḷikkum mukilkaḷum iṭakkavē.
   tērppaṭaiyiṉ ceyal
   357. kaṭutta vicaiyiruḷ koṭutta vulakoru
   kaṇattil valamvaru kaṇippiltēr
   eṭutta koṭiticai ipattiṉ matamicai
   irukkum aḷikaḷai eḻuppavē.
   pōrkkeḻuntatu
   358. eḻuntatu cēṉai yeḻalum
   irintatu pāriṉ mutuku
   viḻuntaṉa kāṉum malaiyum
   veṟuntarai yāṉa ticaikaḷ.
   ituvum atu
   359. atirntaṉa nālu ticaikaḷ
   aṭaṅkiṉa ēḻu kaṭalkaḷ
   pitirntaṉa mūri malaikaḷ
   piṟantatu tūḷi paṭalam.
   ituvum atu
   360. nilattaru tūḷi paruki
   niṟaintatu vāṉiṉ vayiṟu
   valantaru mēka niraikaḷ
   vaṟantaṉa nīrkaḷ cuvaṟi.
   ituvum atu
   361. tayaṅkoḷi ōṭai varaikaḷ
   taruṅkaṭa tārai maḻaiyiṉ
   ayaṅkaḷiṉ vāyiṉ nuraiyiṉ
   aṭaṅkiṉa tūḷi aṭaiya.
   pōrmēṟ celavu
   362. eḻutū ḷiyaṭaṅ kanaṭan tutayat
   tēkun ticaikaṇ ṭatumī ḷaviḻum
   poḻutē kaloḻin tukaṭaṟ paṭaiyep
   poḻutun tavirā tuvaḻik koḷavē.
   karuṇākaraṉ celavu
   363. taṇṇā riṉmalart tiraḷtō ḷapayaṉ
   tāṉē viyacē ṉaitaṉak kaṭaiyak
   kaṇṇā kiyacō ḻaṉacak karamām
   karuṇā karaṉvā raṇamēṟ koḷavē.
   pallava vēntaṉ celavu
   364. toṇṭai yarkkaracu muṉva ruñcuravi
   tuṅka veḷviṭai yuyarttakōṉ
   vaṇṭai yarkkaracu palla varkkaracu
   mālka ḷiṟṟiṉmicai koḷḷavē.
   vāṇakōvaraiyaṉ muṭikoṇṭa cōḻaṉ celavu
   365. vāci koṇṭaracar vāra ṇaṅkavara
   vāṇa kōvaraiyaṉ vāṇmukat
   tūci koṇṭumuṭi koṇṭa cōḻaṉoru
   cūḻi vēḻamicai koḷḷavē.
   pōrmēṟ cellal
   366. maṟittōṭi yevvaracuñ cariya veṉṟu
   varumaṉukkaip pallavarkōṉ vaṇṭai vēntaṉ
   eṟittōṭai ilaṅkunaṭaik kaḷiṟṟiṉ mēṟkoṇ
   ṭiraivēṭṭa perumpulipōl ikaṉmēṟ cella.
   āṟukaḷ pala kaṭantamai
   367. pālā ṟukucait talaipoṉ mukarip
   paḻavā ṟupaṭarn teḻukol liyeṉum
   nālā ṟumakaṉ ṟorupeṇ ṇaiyeṉum
   natiyā ṟukaṭan tunaṭan tuṭaṉē.
   ituvum atu
   368. vayalā ṟupukun tumaṇip puṉalvāy
   maṇṇā ṟuvaḷaṅ keḻukuṉ ṟiyeṉum
   peyalā ṟuparan tuniṟain tuvarum
   pērā ṟumiḻin tatupiṟ paṭavē.
   ituvum atu
   369. kōtā varinati mēlā ṟoṭukuḷir
   pampā natiyoṭu cantappēr
   ōtā varunati orukō tamaiyuṭaṉ
   olinīr malituṟai piṟakāka.
   kaliṅkampukuntu ceyta ceyal
   370. kaṭaiyiṟ puṭaipeyar kaṭalot tamarar
   kalaṅkum paricuka liṅkampuk
   kaṭaiyap paṭareri koḷuvip patikaḷai
   aḻiyac cūṟaikoḷ poḻutattē.
   kaliṅkar nilai
   371. kaṅkā natiyoru puṟamā kappaṭai
   kaṭalpōl vantatu kaṭalvantāl
   eṅkē pukaliṭam eṅkē yiṉiyaraṇ
   yārē atipati yiṅkeṉṟē.
   ituvum atu
   372. iṭikiṉ ṟaṉamatil erikiṉ ṟaṉapati
   eḻukiṉ ṟaṉapukai poḻilellām
   maṭikiṉ ṟaṉakuṭi keṭukiṉ ṟaṉamiṉi
   vaḷaikiṉ ṟaṉapaṭai pakaiyeṉṟē
   kaliṅkar aracaṉiṭam muṟaiyiṭṭatu
   373. ulakuk korumutal apayaṟ kiṭutiṟai
   uraitap piyatema taracēyem
   palakaṟ paṉaikaḷai niṉaivuṟ ṟilaivaru
   paṭaimaṟ ṟavaṉviṭu paṭaiyeṉṟē.
   ituvum atu
   374. uraiyiṟ kuḻaṟiyum uṭaliṟ pataṟiyum
   oruvark koruvarmuṉ muṟaiyiṭṭē
   araiyiṟ ṟukilviḻa aṭaiyac caṉapati
   aṭiyiṟ pukaviḻu poḻutattē.
   kēṭṭa kaliṅka vēntaṉ ceyal
   375. antaramoṉ ṟaṟiyāta vaṭakaliṅkar
   kulavēntaṉ aṉanta paṉmaṉ
   ventaṟukaṇ vekuḷiyiṉāl veytuyirttuk
   kaipuṭaittu viyarttu nōkki.
   kaliṅka vēntaṉ moḻintatu
   376. vaṇṭiṉukkum ticaiyāṉai mataṅkoṭukkum
   malarkkavikai apayaṟ kaṉṟit
   taṇṭiṉukkum eḷiyaṉō eṉavekuṇṭu
   taṭampuyaṅkaḷ kuluṅka nakkē.
   ituvum atu
   377. kāṉaraṇum malaiyaraṇum kaṭalaraṇum
   cūḻkiṭanta kaliṅkar pūmi
   tāṉaraṇa muṭaitteṉṟu karutātu
   varuvatumat taṇṭu pōlum.
   amaiccaṉ moḻintatu
   378. eṉṟu kūṟalum eṅka rāyaṉāṉ
   oṉṟu kūṟuvaṉ kēḷeṉ ṟuṇarttuvāṉ.
   ituvum atu
   379. aracar cīṟuva rēṉumaṭiyavar
   uraice yātoḻi yārka ḷuṟutiyē.
   ituvum atu
   380. ēṉai vēntai yeṟiyac cayataraṉ
   tāṉai allatu tāṉvara vēṇṭumō.
   ituvum atu
   381. viṭṭa taṇṭiṉiṉ mīṉavar aivarum
   keṭṭa kēṭṭiṉaik kēṭṭilai pōlunī.
   ituvum atu
   382. pōriṉ mēṟṟaṇ ṭeṭukkap puṟakkiṭum
   cērar vārttai cevippaṭṭa tillaiyō.
   ituvum atu
   383. vēlai koṇṭu viḻiña maḻittatum
   cālai koṇṭatun taṇṭukoṇ ṭēyaṉṟō.
   ituvum atu
   384. māṟu paṭṭeḻu taṇṭeḻa vattavar
   ēṟu paṭṭatu mimmuṟai yēyaṉṟō.
   ituvum atu
   385. taḷatto ṭumporu taṇṭeḻap paṇṭornāḷ
   aḷatti paṭṭata ṟintilai yaiyanī.
   ituvum atu
   386. taṇṭa nāyakar kākkum navilaiyiṟ
   koṇṭa tāyiraṅ kuñcara mallavō.
   ituvum atu
   387. uḻantu tāmuṭai maṇṭalan taṇṭiṉāl
   iḻanta vēnta reṉaiyareṉ ṟeṇṇukēṉ.
   ituvum atu
   388. kaṇṭu kāṇuṉ puyavali nīyumata
   taṇṭu koṇṭavaṉ cakkaram vantatē.
   ituvum atu
   389. iṉṟu cīṟiṉum nāḷaiyac cēṉaimuṉ
   niṉṟa pōḻtiṉil eṉṉai niṉaittiyāl.
   kēṭṭa kaliṅkarkōṉ moḻintatu
   390. eṉṟivaiyu raittalume ṉakketi
   ruraikkaimai yōrkaḷu naṭuṅku varpuyak
   kuṉṟivaice ruttoḻil peṟātuneṭu
   nāḷmelivu koṇṭapaṭi kaṇṭu milaiyō.
   ituvum atu
   391. piḻaikkavurai ceytaṉaipi ḻaittaṉai
   yeṉakkuṟuti pēcuvatu vāci keṭavō
   muḻaikkaṇ iḷa vāḷari mukatteḷi
   teṉakkaḷiṟu muṭṭiyetir kiṭṭi varumō.
   ituvum atu
   392. eṉṉuṭaiya tōḷvaliyu meṉṉuṭaiya
   vāḷvaliyum yātumaṟi yātu piṟarpōl
   niṉṉuṭaiya pētaimaiyi ṉāluraicey
   tāyituni ṉaippaḷavil vella aritō.
   kaliṅkarkōṉ pōrmēṟ cellak kūṟiyatu
   393. vēḻamira tampuravi vempaṭaiñar
   eṉṟiṉaiya nampaṭaivi raintu kaṭukac
   cōḻakula tuṅkaṉviṭa vantuviṭu
   taṇṭiṉetir ceṉṟamarto ṭaṅku keṉavē.
   ituvum atu
   394. paṇṇuka vayakkaḷiṟu paṇṇuka
   vayappuravi paṇṇuka kaṇippil palatēr
   naṇṇuka paṭaiccerunar naṇṇuka
   cerukkaḷa namakkikal kiṭaitta teṉavē.
   kaliṅkappaṭai eḻunta ārppuk kūṟiyatu
   395. kaliṅkamavai yēḻiṉu meḻuntatoru
   pēroli kaṟaṅkukaṭa lēḻu muṭaṉē
   malaṅkiyeḻu pēroli yeṉatticai
   tikaippuṟa varuntoṉi yeḻunta poḻutē.
   paṭai eḻucci kūṟiyatu
   396. toḷaimuka matamalai yatirvaṉa
   toṭukaṭal parukiya mukileṉavē
   vaḷaimuka nuraiyuka varupari
   kaṭaliṭai maṟitirai yeṉaveḻavē.
   ituvum atu
   397. iṭaiyiṭai yaracarkaḷ iṭukuṭai
   kavarikaḷ ivaikaṭal nuraiyeṉavē
   miṭaikoṭi piṟaḻvaṉa maṟikaṭal
   aṭaiyavum miḷirvaṉa kayaleṉavē.
   ituvum atu
   398. alakiṉo ṭalakukaḷ kalakala
   eṉumoli alaitirai oliyeṉavē
   ulakukaḷ parukuva torukaṭal
   ituveṉa uṭaliya paṭai eḻavē.
   ituvum atu
   399. vicaipeṟa viṭupari iratamum
   maṟikaṭal micaiviṭu kalameṉavē
   icaipeṟa uyiraiyum ikaḻtarum
   iḷaiyavar eṟicuṟa viṉam eṉavē.
   ituvum atu
   400. viṭavikaḷ moṭumoṭu vicaipaṭa
   muṟipaṭa veṟipaṭa neṟipaṭavē
   aṭavikaḷ poṭipaṭa aruvikaḷ
   aṉalpaṭa aruvarai tukaḷpaṭavē.
   ituvum atu
   401. aṟaikaḻal iḷaiyavar muṟukiya
   ciṉavaḻal atuvaṭa vaṉaleṉavē
   muṟaimuṟai muracukaḷ mokumoku
   vatirvaṉa mutirkaṭal atirveṉavē.
   ituvum atu
   402. oruvarta muṭaliṉil oruvartam
   uṭalpuka uṟuvatōr paṭiyukavē
   veruvara miṭaipaṭu naṭuvoru
   veḷiyaṟa viḻiyiṭa ariteṉavē.
   pōrkkeḻutal kūṟiyatu
   403. veḷiyari teṉavetir miṭaipaṭai
   maṉuparaṉ viṭupaṭai yataṉetirē
   eḷiteṉa iraipeṟu puliyeṉa
   valiyiṉo ṭeṭumeṭu meṭumeṉavē.
   -------------

                       12. pōr pāṭiyatu (404-471)

   pōrttoṭakkam
   404. eṭumeṭu meṭumeṉa veṭuttatōr
   ikaloli kaṭaloli ikakkavē
   viṭuviṭu viṭupari karikkuḻām
   viṭumviṭu meṉumoli mikaikkavē.
   ituvum atu
   405. veruvara varicilai terittanāṇ
   vicaipaṭu ticaimukam veṭikkavē
   ceruviṭai avaravar teḻittatōr
   teḻiula kukaḷcevi ṭeṭukkavē.
   irupaṭaikaḷum kaikalantamai
   406. eṟikaṭa loṭukaṭal kiṭaittapōl
   irupaṭai kaḷumetir kiṭaikkavē
   maṟitirai yoṭutirai malaittapōl
   varupari yoṭupari malaikkavē.
   yāṉaippaṭaiyum tērppaṭaiyum malaintamai
   407. kaṉavarai yoṭuvarai muṉaittapōl
   kaṭakari yoṭukari muṉaikkavē
   iṉamukil mukiloṭu metirttapōl
   iratamo ṭiratamum etirkkavē.
   vīrarkaḷum aracarkaḷum malaintamai
   408. porupuli puliyoṭu cilaittapōl
   porupaṭa roṭupaṭar cilaikkavē
   ariyiṉo ṭariyiṉam aṭarppapōl
   aracarum aracarum aṭarkkavē.
   pōriṉ kaṭumai
   409. viḷaikaṉal viḻikaḷiṉ muḷaikkavē
   miṉaloḷi kaṉaliṭai eṟikkavē
   vaḷaicilai yurumeṉa iṭikkavē
   vaṭikaṇai neṭumaḻai paṭaikkavē.
   kurutiyāṟṟiyalpu
   410. kurutiyiṉ nativeḷi parakkavē
   kuṭaiyiṉam nuraiyeṉa mitakkavē
   karituṇi paṭumuṭal aṭukkiyē
   karaieṉa irupuṭai kiṭakkavē.
   yāṉaip pōr
   411. maruppoṭu maruppetir poruppivai
   eṉapporu matakkari maruppi ṉiṭaiyē
   neruppoṭu neruppetir cuṭarppoṟi
   teṟitteḻa niḻaṟkoṭi taḻaṟka tuvavē.
   ituvum atu
   412. niḻaṟkoṭi taḻaṟkatu valiṉkaṭi
   toḷittavai niṉaippavar niṉaippa taṉmuṉē
   aḻaṟpaṭu pukaikkoṭi eṭuttaṉa
   putukkoṭi aṉaittiṉu niraitta teṉavē.
   ituvum atu
   413. iṭattiṭai valattiṭai iruttiya
   tuṇaikkaram nikarttaṉa aṭutta kariyiṉ
   kaṭatteḻu matattiṭai maṭuttaṉa
   ciṟappoṭu kaṟuttaṉa avaṟṟiṉ eyiṟē.
   ituvum atu
   414. eyiṟuka ḷuṭaiyapo ruppaiva littiṭai
   etiretir irupaṇai iṭṭumu ṟukkiya
   kayiṟukaḷ ivaiyeṉa akkara ṭakkari
   karamoṭu karametir teṟṟiva likkavē.
   kutiraippaṭaip pōr
   415. muṭukiya pavaṉapa tattilu kakkaṭai
   muṭiviṉil ulakamu ṇaccuṭar viṭṭeḻu
   kaṭukiya vaṭaaṉa lattiṉai vaittatu
   kaḷamuṟu turakaka ṇattiṉmu kattilē.
   yāṉaiyoṭu poruvōr iyalpu
   416. kaḷamuṟu turakaka ṇattiṉmu kattetir
   kaṟuvilar cilarkala vittalai nittila
   iḷamulai etirporum appoḻu tippoḻu
   teṉavetir kariyiṉma ruppiṉmuṉ niṟparē.
   ituvum atu
   417. etirporu kariyiṉma ruppaiu rattiṉil
   iṟaeṟi paṭaiyiṉi ṟuttumi ṟaitteḻu
   caturarkaḷ maṇiyaka lattuma ruppavai
   cayamakaḷ kaḷapamu laikkuṟi ottatē.
   kutiraivīrar yāṉaippaṭaiyai aḻittamai
   418. cayamakaḷ kaḷapamu laikkaṇi yattaku
   taṉivaṭam ivaiyeṉa mattaka muttiṉai
   ayametir kaṭavima takkari veṭṭiṉar
   alaipaṭai tiraikaḷka ḷattuni raikkavē.
   pōrkkaḷam tīyil mūḻkiyatu
   419. alaipaṭai niraikaṇi raittace rukkaḷam
   aḻalpuri kaḷameṉa oppila viṟpaṭai
   talaipora eriyane ruppiṉiṉ maṟṟatu
   taḻalpaṭu kaḻaivaṉam okkiṉu mokkumē.
   viṟpōr
   420. taḻalpaṭu kaḻaivaṉam eppaṭi appaṭi
   caṭacaṭa tamarame ḻappaka ḻippaṭai
   aḻalpaṭu pukaiyoṭi ḻicciya kaiccilai
   aṭucilai pakaḻito ṭuttuva lipparē.
   veṭṭuṇṭa vilvīrar iyalpu
   421. aṭucilai pakaḻito ṭuttuvi ṭappukum
   aḷaviṉil ayametir viṭṭavar veṭṭiṉa
   uṭalcila irutuṇi paṭṭaṉa paṭṭapiṉ
   orutuṇi karutumi lakkaiya ḻikkumē.
   avar villiṉ ceyal
   422. orutuṇi karutumi lakkaiya ḻittaṉa
   uruviya piṟaimuka appaka ḻittalai
   aritari tituvume ṉappari yuyppavar
   aṭiyoṭu muṭikaḷ tuṇittuvi ḻuttumē.
   kutiraivīrar ceyal
   423. aṭiyoṭu muṭikaḷtu ṇittuvi ḻappukum
   aḷavari toṭaicama rattoṭa ṇaittaṉar
   neṭiyaṉa cilacaram appaṭi peṟṟavar
   niṟaicaram nimiravi ṭattuṇi yuṟṟavē.
   kutiraivīrarāl aḻintōr ceyal
   424. niṟaicaram nimiravi ṭattuṇi uṟṟavar
   neṟiyiṉai oṭiyeṟi kiṟpava rottetir
   aṟaikaḻal virutarce rukkaṟa veṭṭaliṉ
   avaruṭal iruvakir paṭṭaṉa muṭṭavē.
   kaliṅkavīrar ceyal
   425. viṭutta vīra rāyu taṅkaḷ
   mēlvi ḻāma ēlanirait
   teṭutta vēli pōṟka liṅkar
   vaṭṭa ṇaṅkaḷ iṭṭavē.
   kaliṅkar kēṭakaṅkaḷ tuḷaipaṭṭamai
   426. iṭṭa vaṭṭa ṇaṅkaṇ mēle
   ṟinta vēlti ṟantavāy
   vaṭṭa miṭṭa nīḷma tiṟku
   vaitta pūḻai okkumē.
   vāṭpaṭaiyum ulakkaippaṭaiyumkoṇṭu porutamai
   427. kalakka maṟṟa vīrar vāḷka
   lanta cūrar kaittalat
   tulakkai ucci taitta pōtu
   ḻuṅka lappai okkumē.
   tuṇintu vīḻnta yāṉait tutikkainilai
   428. matta yāṉai yiṉka ramcu
   ruṇṭu vīḻa vaṉcaram
   taitta pōḻtiṉ akka raṅkaḷ
   cakka raṅka ḷokkumē.
   yāṉai mattakam piḷantamai
   429. veṅka ḷiṟṟiṉ matta kattiṉ
   vīḻu muttu vīramā
   maṅkai yarkku maṅka lappo
   ricco rinta tokkumē.
   kēṭakattōṭu vīrar vīḻnta nilai
   430. maṟinta kēṭa kamki ṭappa
   maintar tuñci vaikuvōr
   paṟinta tēriṉ nēmi yōṭu
   pārki ṭappa tokkumē.
   cakkarappaṭaiyum taṇṭuppaṭaiyum porutamai
   431. kaḷitta vīrar viṭṭa nēmi
   kaṇṭu vīcu taṇṭiṭaik
   kuḷitta pōḻtu kaippi ṭitta
   kūrma ḻukka ḷokkumē.
   kuṟai uṭalaṅkaḷiṉ āṭṭam
   432. kavanta māṭa muṉpu tamka
   ḷippo ṭāṭu pēyiṉam
   nivanta vāṭal āṭṭu vikku
   nitta kārar okkumē.
   yāṉai kutirai oṭṭakam tiriyunilai
   433. oṭṭa kaṅkaḷ yāṉai vālu
   yartta māa ḻintapōr
   viṭṭa kaṉṟu pōki lātu
   mīḷva pōlum mīḷumē.
   kuruti veḷḷattil paṭṭu vīḻnta yāṉaiyiṉ iyalpu
   434. piṟaṅku cōri vāri yiṟpi
   ḷiṟṟi vīḻka ḷiṟṟiṉam
   kaṟaṅku vēlai nīru ṇakka
   viḻnta mēkam okkumē.
   yāṉaiyiṉ tutikkai tuṇittōr iyalpu
   435. vāḷil veṭṭi vāra ṇakkai
   tōḷil iṭṭa maintartām
   tōḷil iṭṭu nīrvi ṭuntu
   rutti yāḷar opparē.
   ampu toḷaitta villōr iyalpu
   436. nērmuṉaiyil toṭutta pakaḻikaḷ
   nērvaḷaiyil cuḻaṟṟu maḷaviṉil
   mārpiṭaiyil kuḷitta pakaḻiyai
   vārcilaiyil toṭuttu viṭuvarē.
   kutiraiyai vīḻttiya vīrar iyalpu
   437. acaiyaurat taḻutti ivuḷiyai
   aṭucavaḷat teṭutta poḻutavai
   vicaiyamakat teṭutta koṭiyeṉa
   virutarkaḷat teṭuttu varuvarē.
   toṭai veṭṭuṇṭa vīrar ceyal
   438. irutoṭaiyaṟ ṟirukku maṟavarkaḷ
   etirporukaik kaḷiṟṟiṉ valikeṭa
   orutoṭaiyaic cuḻaṟṟi eṟivarkaḷ
   orutoṭaiiṭ ṭuvaippar eṟiyavē.
   vāṭpōr
   439. iruvarurat tiṉuṟṟa curikaiyiṉ
   etiretirpuk kiḻaikku maḷaviṉil
   oruvareṉak kiṭaitta poḻutiṉil
   upayapalat teṭutta taravamē.
   vīrar yāṉaivīrarōṭu porutamai
   440. porunarkaḷ cilartamu ratti ṉiṟkaviḻ
   pukarmukam micaiyaṭi yiṭṭa tiṟpakai
   virutarai arivarci rattai acciram
   viḻupoḻu taṟaiyeṉum akka ḷiṟṟaiyē.
   paṭai aṟṟōr kutiraiyoṭu porutamai
   441. viṭupaṭai peṟukilar maṟṟi ṉiccilar
   viraipari viḻaeṟi taṟku muṟpaṭa
   aṭukari nutalpaṭa viṭṭa kaippaṭai
   ataṉaiyor noṭivarai yiṟpa ṟipparē.
   vīraṉ yāṉaippaṭaiyāṉōṭu poruttu
   442. amarpuri tamataka latti ṭaikkaviḻ
   aṭukari nutalila ṭippar ikkaḷi
   ṟemateṉa irukaṇvi ḻikka uṭkiṉar
   eṉaviṭu kilarpaṭai ñarkku veṭkiyē.
   karuṇākaraṉ pōril muṉaital
   443. alakil cerumutir poḻutu vaṇṭaiyar
   aracaṉ aracarkaḷ nātaṉ mantiri
   ulaku pukaḻkaru ṇāka raṉṟaṉa
   torukai irupaṇai vēḻam untavē.
   veṟṟikāṇa irupaṭaiyum orumukappaṭṭamai
   444. upaya palamumvi ṭātu veñcamam
   uṭalu poḻutiṉil vākai muṉkoḷa
   apayaṉ viṭupaṭai ēḻka liṅkamum
   aṭaiya orumuka māki muntavē.
   irupaṭaiyum kiḷarnteḻuntamai
   445. aṇikaḷ orumuka māka untiṉa
   amarar amaratu kāṇa muntiṉar
   tuṇikaḷ paṭamata māmu ṟintaṉa
   turaka niraiyoṭu tērmu ṟintavē.
   pōriṉ kaṭumai
   446. virutar irutuṇi pārni ṟaintaṉa
   viṭarkaḷ talaimalai yāyne ḷintaṉa
   kuruti kuraikaṭal pōlpa rantaṉa
   kuṭarkaḷ kurutiyiṉ mēlmi tantavē
   ituvum atu
   447. karikaḷ karuvikaḷōṭu cintiṉa
   kaḻuku nariyoṭu kākam uṇṭaṉa
   tiraikaḷ ticaimalai yōṭa ṭarntaṉa
   timila kumilame lāmvi ḷaintavē.
   kaliṅka vēntaṉ porutalāṟṟātu otuṅkiyamai
   448. puracai matamalai āyi raṅkoṭu
   poruva meṉavarum ēḻka liṅkartam
   aracaṉ uraiceyta āṇmai yuṅkeṭa
   amaril etirviḻi yāto tuṅkiyē.
   kaliṅka vēntaṉ kaḷattaiviṭṭu maṟaintu ceṉṟatu
   449. aṟiyum muḻaikaḷi lōpatuṅkiya
   tariya pilaṉiṭai yōma ṟaintatu
   ceṟiyum aṭaviyi lōka rantatu
   teriya ariyate ṉāa ṭaṅkavē.
   kaliṅkar naṭukkam
   450. etukol ituitu māyai oṉṟukol
   erikol maṟalikol ūḻiyiṉkaṭai
   atukol eṉavala ṟāvi ḻuntaṉar
   alati kulatiyō ṭēḻka liṅkarē.
   kaliṅkar citaintōṭiyatu
   451. vaḻivar cilarkaṭal pāyvar veṅkari
   maṟaivar cilarvaḻi tēṭi vaṉpilam
   iḻivar cilarcilar tūṟu maṇṭuvar
   iruvar oruvaḻi pōkal iṉṟiyē.
   ituvum atu
   452. oruvar oruvariṉ ōṭa muntiṉar
   uṭaliṉ niḻaliṉai ōṭa añciṉar
   aruvar varuvare ṉāvi ṟaiñciṉar
   apayam apayame ṉāna ṭuṅkiyē
   ituvum atu
   453. maḻaikaḷ atirvaṉa pōlu ṭaṉṟaṉa
   vaḷavaṉ viṭupaṭai vēḻam eṉṟiruḷ
   muḻaikaḷ nuḻaivarkaḷ pōril iṉṟunam
   mutuku ceyumupa kāra meṉparē.
   ituvum atu
   454. oruka liṅkamo ruvaṉa ḻittanāḷ
   oruka liṅkamo ruvaru ṭuttatē.
   cōḻarpaṭai yāṉai kutiraikaḷaik kaipaṟṟiyatu
   455. appaṭik kaliṅka rōṭa
   aṭartteṟi cēṉai vīrar
   kaippaṭu kaḷiṟum māvum
   kaṇitturaip pavarkaḷ yārē?
   kaippaṭṭa kaḷiṟukaḷiṉ taṉmai
   456. puṇtaru kuruti pāyap
   poḻitaru kaṭamum pāya
   vaṇṭoṭum parunti ṉōṭum
   vaḷaippuṇṭa kaḷiṟa nēkam.
   ituvum atu
   457. oṭṭaṟap paṭṭa pōril
   ūrpavar tammai vīcik
   kaṭṭaṟut tavarpōl niṉṟu
   kaṭṭuṇṭa kaḷiṟa nēkam.
   ituvum atu
   458. varaicila pulika ḷōṭu
   vantakaṭ ṭuṇṭa vēpōl
   aracarun tāmum kaṇṭuṇṭu
   akappaṭṭa kaḷiṟa nēkam.
   cōḻavīrar kavarnta poruḷkaḷ
   459. naṭaiva yappari yiratam oṭṭakam
   navati tikkula makaḷireṉṟu
   aṭaiya vappoḻutu avarkaḷ kaikkoḷum
   avaika ṇippatum arumaiyē.
   karuṇākaraṉ kaliṅkavēntaṉaik koṇarumāṟu ēviyatu
   460. ivaika varntapiṉ eḻuka liṅkartam
   iṟaiyai yuṅkoṭu peyartumeṉṟu
   avaṉi runtuḻi aṟika veṉṟaṉaṉ
   apayaṉ mantiri mutalvaṉē.
   oṟṟarkaḷ kaliṅkarkōṉait tēṭiyamai
   461. uraikaḷ piṟpaṭu maḷavil oṟṟarkaḷ
   olika ṭaṟpaṭai kaṭitupōy
   varaika ḷilpuṭai taṭavi appaṭi
   vaṉami laippurai taṭaviyē
   oṟṟarkaḷ moḻintamai
   462. cuvaṭu peṟṟilam avaṉai maṟṟoru
   cuvaṭu peṟṟaṉam orumalaik
   kuvaṭu paṟṟiyatu avaṉa ṭaṟpaṭai
   atuku ṇipparitu eṉalumē.
   atukēṭṭa paṭaiñar ceyti
   463. ekkuvaṭum ekkaṭalum entak kāṭum
   iṉikkaliṅkark karaṇāvatu iṉṟē nāḷum
   akkuvaṭu makkaṭalum vaḷaintu veyyōṉ
   attamaṉak kuvaṭaṇaiyum aḷaviṟ ceṉṟē.
   paṭaiñar kuṉṟaic cūḻntu niṉṟamai
   464. tōlāta kaḷiṟṟapayaṉ vēṭṭaippaṉṟi
   toḻuvaṭaittut toḻuvataṉaik kāppārpōla
   vēlālum villālum vēli kōli
   veṟpataṉai viṭiyaḷavuṅ kāttu niṉṟē.
   kuṉṟu kātta kaliṅkavīrarai aḻittamai
   465. cemmalaiyāy oḷipaṭaitta tiyātō eṉṟum
   ceṅkatirōṉ utayañceytu utaya meṉṉum
   ammalaiyō immalaiyum eṉṉat tevvar
   aḻikuruti natiparakka aṟukkum pōḻtil.
   kaliṅkar māṟṟurukkoṇṭu karantamai
   466. varaikkaliṅkar tamaiccēra mācai ēṟṟi
   vaṉtūṟu paṟittamayirk kuṟaiyum vāṅki
   araikkaliṅkam urippuṇṭa kaliṅkar ellām
   amaṇareṉap piḻaittārum anēkar āṅkē.
   ituvum atu
   467. vēṭattāl kuṟaiyātu munnūlāka
   veñcilaināṇ maṭittiṭṭu vitiyāṟ kaṅkai
   āṭappōn takappaṭṭōm karantōm eṉṟē
   aritaṉaiviṭṭu uyirpiḻaittār anēkar āṅkē.
   ituvum atu
   468. kuṟiyākak kurutikoṭi āṭai yākak
   koṇṭuṭuttup pōrttuttaṅ kuñci muṇṭittu
   aṟiyīrō cākkiyarai yuṭaikaṇ ṭāleṉ
   appuṟameṉ ṟiyampiṭuvar anēkar āṅkē.
   ituvum atu
   469. cēṉaimaṭi kaḷaṅkaṇṭēm tikaittu niṉṟēm
   teluṅkarēm eṉṟucila kaliṅkar taṅkaḷ
   āṉaimaṇi yiṉaittāḷam piṭittuk kumpiṭṭu
   aṭippāṇar eṉappiḻaittār anēkar āṅkē.
   cōḻavīrar kaliṅkar aṟa aḻittatu
   470. ivarkaḷmēl iṉiyoruvar piḻaittār illai
   eḻukaliṅkattu ōviyarkaḷ eḻuti vaitta
   cuvarkaḷmēl uṭalaṉṟi uṭalka ḷeṅkum
   toṭarntupiṭit taṟuttārmuṉ aṭaiya āṅkē.
   karuṇākaraṉ kulōttuṅkaṉ kaḻal paṇintatu
   471. kaṭaṟkaliṅkam eṟintu cayat tampam nāṭṭik
   kaṭakariyum kuvitaṉamum kavarntu teyvac
   cuṭarppaṭaivāḷ apayaṉaṭi aruḷi ṉōṭuñ
   cūṭiṉāṉ vaṇṭaiyarkōṉ toṇṭaimāṉē.
   ---------------

                      13. kaḷam pāṭiyatu (472-596)

   pōrkkaḷap perumai
   472. tēvācuram rāmāyaṇam māpāratam uḷaveṉṟu
   ōvāurai ōyumpaṭi uḷatapporu kaḷamē.
   kaliṅkappēy kāḷiyaik kaḷam kāṇumāṟu aḻaittalum
   kāḷi kaḷam kuṟukalum
   473. kālakkaḷa matukaṇṭaruḷ iṟaivīkaṭi teṉavē
   ālakkaḷa muṭaiyāṉmakiḻ amutakkaḷam aṇuki.
   kāḷi pōrkkaḷaṅkaṇṭu viyantumoḻintatu
   474. eṉṉēoru ceruveṅkaḷam
   eṉavēyati cayamuṟṟu
   annēriḻai alakaikkaṇa
   mavaikaṇṭiṭa moḻiyum.
   kuruti veḷḷattil yāṉai mitantu ceṉṟamai
   475. uṭaliṉmēl palakāyañ corintu piṉkāl
   uṭaṉpataippa utirattē oḻukum yāṉai
   kaṭaliṉmēl kalantoṭarap piṉṉē celluṅ
   kalampōṉṟu tōṉṟuvaṉa kāṇmiṉ kāṇmiṉ.
   kutiraikaḷ aṭipeyarkkalāṟṟātu niṉṟamai
   476. neṭuṅkutirai micaik kalaṇai cariyap pāyntu
   niṇaccēṟṟiṟ kālkuḷippa niraiyē niṉṟu
   paṭuṅkurutik kaṭumpuṉalai aṭaikkap pāynta
   palakutirait taṟipōṉṟa paricu kāṇmiṉ.
   vīrar mukamalarntu kiṭantamai
   477. viruntiṉarum vaṟiyavarum neruṅki yuṇṇa
   mēṉmēlum mukamalarum mēlōr pōlap
   paruntiṉamum kaḻukiṉamum tāmē yuṇṇap
   patumamukam malarntāraip pārmiṉ pārmiṉ.
   kuṟṟuyirāyk kiṭanta vīrarai nari cūḻntiruntamai
   478. cāmaḷavum piṟarkkutavā tavarai naccic
   cārunarpōl vīraruṭal tarikkum āvi
   pōmaḷavum avararukē iruntu viṭṭup
   pōkāta narikkulattiṉ puṇarcci kāṇmiṉ.
   kaḷattē vīḻntu kiṭakkum yāṉai iyalpu
   479. māmaḻaipōl poḻikiṉṟa tāṉavāri
   maṟuttuviḻuṅ kaṭakaḷiṟṟai veṟuttu vāṉōr
   pūmaḻaimēl pāynteḻuntu niranta vaṇṭu
   poruṭpeṇṭir pōṉṟamaiyum kāṇmiṉ kāṇmiṉ.
   koṭiyōṭu vīḻntu kiṭakkum yāṉaikaḷaik kūṟiyatu
   480. cāyntuviḻum kaṭakaḷiṟṟi ṉuṭaṉē cāyntu
   taṭaṅkuruti micaippaṭiyum koṭikaḷ taṅkaḷ
   kāntaruṭaṉ kaṉalamaḷi yataṉmēl vaikuṅ
   kaṟpuṭaimā taraiottal kāṇmiṉ kāṇmiṉ.
   kaṇavarait tēṭiya maṉaiviyar ceyal
   481. taṅkaṇava ruṭaṉtāmum pōka veṉṟē
   cātakaraik kēṭpārē taṭavip pārppār
   eṅkaṇavar kiṭantaviṭam eṅkē yeṉṟeṉṟu
   iṭākiṉiyaik kēṭpāraik kāṇmiṉ kāṇmiṉ.
   kaṇavaṉaikkaṇṭu āvicōrnta maṉaivi iyalpu
   482. vāymaṭittuk kiṭantatalai makaṉai nōkki
   maṇiyatarattu ētēṉum vaṭuvuṇ ṭāyō
   nīmaṭittuk kiṭantateṉap pulavi kūrntu
   niṉṟāvi cōrvāḷaik kāṇmiṉ kāṇmiṉ.
   kaṇavaṉait taḻuvi uyirviṭṭa peṇṭir iyalpu
   483. taraimakaḷtaṉ koḻunaṉṟaṉ uṭalan taṉṉait
   tāṅkāmal taṉṉuṭalāṟ ṟāṅki viṇṇāṭ
   ṭaramakaḷir avvuyiraip puṇarā muṉṉam
   āviokka viṭuvāḷaik kāṇmiṉ kāṇmiṉ.
   kaṇavaṉ talai peṟṟa maṉaiviyiṉ ceyal
   484. porutaṭakkai vāḷeṅkē maṇimār peṅkē
   pōrmukattil evarvariṉum puṟaṅko ṭāta
   paruvayirat tōḷeṅkē eṅkē yeṉṟu
   payiraviyaik kēṭpāḷaik kāṇmiṉ kāṇmiṉ.
   evviṭamum kurutikkaṟai yuṇṭatu
   485. āṭaṟṟu raṅkampi ṭittuāḷai yāḷōṭa
   ṭittuṇippu ṭaittavvi rumpuṇṇiṉīr
   ōṭitte ṟikkakka ruṅkoṇṭal ceṅkoṇṭal
   okkiṉṟa ivvāṟu kāṇmiṉkaḷō.
   niṇakkuviyaliṭattirunta kākaṅkaḷiṉ iyalpu
   486. neruṅkuāka vacceṅka ḷattēta
   yaṅkunni ṇappōrvai mūṭikkoḷak
   karuṅkākam veṇkāka māyniṉṟa
   vāmuṉpu kāṇāta kāṇmiṉkaḷō.
   kaḷam tāmaraip poykai pōṉṟu kāṭciyaḷittatu
   487. miṭaiyuṟṟa tērmoṭṭu moṭṭokka
   veñcōri nīrokka vīḻtoṅkalpā
   caṭaiyokka aṭuceṅka ḷampaṅka
   yappoykai yāmāṟu kāṇmiṉkaḷō.
   vēl taittu nilattuviḻā vīrarnilai
   488. veyiltārai vēlcūḻa vumtaikka
   maṇmēl viḻāvīrar vēḻampartaṅ
   kayiṟṟā liḻuppuṇṭu cāyātu
   niṟkum kaḻāyottal kāṇmiṉkaḷō.
   kaḷattil kaḻukum paruntum kaṇṭa kāṭci
   489. iruppukka vantattiṉ mītēṟa
   lumcūrar eḵkampu taikka iṟakaip
   parappiccu ḻaṉṟiṅkor pāṟāṭa
   ītōr paruntāṭal kāṇmiṉkaḷō.
   vil vāḷ vīrar kiṭantamai kaṇṭu kūṟiyatu
   490. varuñcēṉai tañcēṉai mēlvantu
   ṟāmēvil vāḷvīrar vāṇāḷukak
   karuñcēva kañceytu ceñcōṟa
   ṟacceyta kaimmāṟu kāṇmiṉkaḷō.
   yāṉaivīrar talaiyiṉ kāṭci
   491. yāṉaippa ṭaiccūrar nērāṉa
   pōḻtaṟ ṟeḻuntāṭu kiṉṟārtalai
   māṉacca yappāvai viṭṭāṭum
   ammāṉai vaṭṭottal kāṇmiṉkaḷō.
   vicumpil kaṇṭa kāṭci
   492. etirkoḷuñ curarvimā ṉaṅkaḷiṟ curarkaḷāy
   ēṟumā ṉavarkaḷtām eṇṇutaṟ karumaiyiṉ
   katirvicum pataṉilē itaṉilum periyatōr
   kāḷaiyam viḷaiyumā kāṇmiṉō kāṇmiṉō.
   kurutik kaṭal
   493. avaripañ corimataṅ kaḻieṉap pukamaṭut
   tavarparit tiraiyalait tamarceykā liṅkartam
   kavariveṇ nurainirait tavaruṭaṟ kurutiyiṉ
   kaṭalparan tōṭumā kāṇmiṉō kāṇmiṉō.
   yāṉainirai kaṭalaṇai pōṉṟamai
   494. puvipuran taruḷceyum cayataraṉ orumuṟaip
   puṇarimel aṇaipaṭap poruvilvil kuṉitaliṉ
   kavikulam kaṭaliṭaic coriperuṅ kiriyeṉak
   karikaḷiṉ piṇamitiṟ kāṇmiṉō kāṇmiṉō.
   vil tiṟaṉ kaṇṭu viyanta vīrar nilai
   495. uṟṟavāy amputam paricaiyum karuviyum
   uruvimār pakalamum uruvivīḻ cerunarvil
   kaṟṟavā oruvaṉvil kaṟṟavā eṉṟutam
   kaimmaṟit tavaraiyum kāṇmiṉō kāṇmiṉō.
   kaṇviḻittuk kiṭakkum vīrar nilai
   496. viṇṇiṉmoyt teḻuvimā ṉaṅkaḷiṟ curarkaḷāy
   mītupō muyirkaḷē yaṉṟiyē iṉṟutam
   kaṇṇimaip poḻiyavē mukamalarn tuṭalkaḷum
   kaṭavuḷōr pōlumā kāṇmiṉō kāṇmiṉō.
   veṭṭuṇṭa yāṉait talaikaḷiṉ kāṭci
   497. piṟaippe rumpaṇai vēḻam muṉṉoṭu
   piṉtu ṇintu taraippaṭum
   kuṟaitta laittuṇi kollaṉ eḵkeṟi
   kūṭam ottamai kāṇmiṉō.
   vāypuku vēlpaṟṟik kiṭanta vīrarnilai
   498. vāyi ṉilpuku vēlkaḷ paṟṟu
   valakkai yōṭuni lattiṭaic
   cāyu maṟṟavar kāḷam ūtikaḷ
   tammai ottamai kāṇmiṉō.
   vēlūṉṟit tērmēl niṟpārnilai
   499. paṭavūṉṟu neṭuṅkuntam mārpi ṉiṉṟu
   paṟittaṉai nilattūṉṟit tērmēl niṟpār
   paṭavūṉṟi viṭuntoḻilōr eṉṉa muṉṉam
   pacuṅkuruti nīrtōṉṟum paricu kāṇmiṉ.
   niṇameṉa ampu vāykoṇṭa paruntiṉ nilai
   500. vāyakalam parattamoṭu niṇaṅkoṇ ṭōṭa
   maṟṟataṉai vaḷḷukiriṉ paruntu kōṇal
   vāyakalam parattiṉiṭaik kauvi valvāy
   vakirppaṭṭu nilampaṭṭa vaṇṇaṅ kāṇmiṉ.
   piṇantiṉ pūtattiṉ celavu
   501. cāturaṅkat talaivaṉaippōrk kaḷattil vanta
   taḻaivayiṟṟup pūtantāṉ arunti mikka
   cāturaṅkam talaicumantu kamañcūl koṇṭu
   taṉippaṭuṅkār eṉavarumat taṉmai kāṇmiṉ.
   mārpil viḻuppuṇpaṭṭa yāṉaivīraraik kūṟiyatu.
   502. mutukuvaṭip paṭiyirukkum eṉṉa niṟkum
   muṉaikkaḷiṟṟōr cerukkaḷattu muntutaṅkaḷ
   mutukuvaṭup paṭumeṉṟa vaṭuvai añci
   muṉṉamvaṭup paṭṭārai iṉṉam kāṇmiṉ.
   kāḷi pēykaḷaik kūḻaṭumāṟu moḻintatu
   503. kaḷamaṭaiyak kāṭṭutaṟku muṭiva taṉṟu
   kaviḻumatak karicoriyak kumiḻi viṭṭuk
   kuḷamaṭaipaṭ ṭatupōlum kuruti yāṭik
   kūḻaṭumiṉ eṉṟaruḷak kumpiṭ ṭāṅkē.
   pēykaḷ oṉṟaṉaiyoṉ ṟaḻaittal
   504. kuṟumō ṭīneṭu niṇamā lāykuṭai kalatī kūreyi ṟīnīli
   maṟimā ṭīkutir vayiṟī kūḻaṭa vārīr kūḻaṭa vārīrē.
   pēykaḷ pal tulakkam
   505. paṟinta maruppiṉ veṇkōlāl
   pallai viḷakkik koḷḷīrē
   maṟinta kaḷiṟṟiṉ paḻuelumpai
   vāṅki nākkai vaḻiyīrē.
   nakam tiruttalum eṇṇey iṭalum
   506. vāyam pukaḷām ukirkoḷḷi vāṅki ukirai vāṅkīrē
   pāyuṅ kaḷiṟṟiṉ matattayilam pāyap pāya vārīrē.
   eṇṇey tēyttapiṉ muḻukal
   507. eṇṇeypōka veṇmūḷai
   eṉṉuṅ kaḷiyāṉ mayir kuḻappip
   paṇṇaiyākak kurutimaṭup
   pāyntu nīnti yāṭīrē.
   ituvum atu
   508. kurutik kuṭṭa mittaṉaiyuṅ kōlum vēlum kuntamumē
   karuvikkaṭṭu māṭṭātīr karaikkē iruntu kuḷiyīrē.
   uṭai uṭuttal
   509. āḻnta kuruti maṭunīnti
   aṅkē iṉaiyā tiṅkēṟi
   vīḻnta kaliṅkar niṇakkaliṅkam
   virittu virittup puṉaiyīrē.
   kaivaḷaiyum kālaṇiyum puṉaital
   510. mataṅkoḷ kariyiṉ kōḷakaiyai
   maṇiccū ṭakamāc ceṟiyīrē
   pataṅkoḷ puravip paṭitaraḷap
   poṟpā ṭakamāp puṉaiyīrē.
   kātaṇi puṉaital
   511. īṇṭum ceruviṟ paṭuvīrar
   eṟiyum pārā vaḷaiyaṭukki
   vēṇṭumaḷavum vāynekiḻttu
   viṭukam pikaḷāp puṉaiyīrē.
   ituvum atu
   512. paṇaitta paṉaiveṅ karikkarattāl
   pariya karunāṇ kaṭṭīrē
   iṇaitta muracam vāḷkāmpiṭ
   ṭiraṭṭai vāḷi ēṟṟīrē.
   tōḷaṇiyum kaḻuttaṇiyum puṉaital
   513. paṭṭa puravik kavikurattāl
   pāku valayañ cāttīrē
   iṭṭa curicaṅ keṭuttukkōttu
   ēkā valiyuñ cāttīrē.
   vaṉṉacara maṇital
   514. poruciṉa vīrartam kaṇmaṇiyum
   pōtaka mattaka muttumvāṅki
   varicaiya ṟintu narampiṟkōttu
   vaṉṉaca raṅkaḷ aṇiyīrē.
   pēykaḷ uṇavu kuṟitteḻal
   515. koḷḷum eṉaippala kōlameṉmēl
   koṇṭiṭa vēḷaiyum mītūra
   uḷḷum puṟampum vetumpuṅkāṇ
   uṇpata ṉukkorup paṭuvīrē.
   aṭukkaḷai amaittal
   516. mākāya matamalaiyiṉ piṇamalaimēl
   vaṉkaḻukiṉ ciṟakāl ceyta
   ākāya mēṟkaṭṭi yataṉkīḻē
   aṭukkaḷaikoṇṭu aṭumi ṉammā.
   meḻukik kōlamiṭṭu aṭuppamaittal
   517. poḻimatattāl nilameḻukip poṭintutirnta
   poṭittaraḷap piṇṭi tīṭṭi
   aḻimatatta mattakattai aṭuppākak
   kaṭuppākkoṇṭu aṭumi ṉammā.
   pāṉaiyai aṭuppēṟṟutal
   518. koṟṟavāḷ maṟavar ōccak kuṭarōṭu talaiyuṅ kālum
   aṟṟuvīḻ āṉaip pāṉai aṭuppiṉil ēṟṟu mammā.
   uṇavup paṇṭam koṇartal
   519. veṇṭayirum centayirum virāykkiṭanta
   kiḻāṉ pōla vīrar mūḷait
   taṇṭayirum miṭaivitta puḷitamumāt
   tāḻitoṟum tammi ṉammā.
   ulaivaittal
   520. kolaiyiṉuṭ paṭukarik kuḻiciyuṭ kūḻiṉuk
   kulaiyeṉak kutiraiyiṉ utiramē corimiṉō
   kāyamum uppum iṭutal
   521. tuḷḷiveṅ kaḷaṉilvīḻ turakaveṇ palleṉum
   uḷḷiyuṅ kiḷḷiyiṭ ṭukiriṉuppu iṭumiṉō.
   tīmūṭṭutal
   522. taṉivicum paṭaiyiṉum paṭaiñarkaṇ tavirkilā
   muṉivueṉuṅ kaṉalainīr mūḷavait tiṭumiṉō.
   viṟakukoṇṭu erittal
   523. kuntamum pakaḻiyum kōlkaḷum vēlumām
   intaṉam palaveṭuttu iṭaimaṭut terimiṉō.
   arici koṇartal
   524. kallaik kaṟittup palmuṟintu
   taviḻntu vīḻnta kaliṅkartam
   pallait takarttup paḻaarici
   ākap paṇṇik koḷḷīrē.
   arici kuṟṟum ural
   525. cuvaikkum muṭivil kūḻiṉukkuc
   coriyum arici varieyiṟā
   avaikkum uralkaḷ eṉakkuralkaḷ
   avinta muracam koḷḷīrē.
   ulakkai koṇṭu kuṟṟal
   526. inta uraṟkaṇ ivvarici
   ellām peytu kolyāṉait
   tanta ulakkai taṉaiyōccic
   calukku mulukkeṉak kuṟṟīrē.
   kāḷiyaip pāṭi arici kuṟṟutal
   527. taṇanta melivu tāṉtīrat
   taṭitta uṭalvem pacitīrap
   piṇantaru nācciyaip pāṭīrē
   peruntiru vāṭṭiyaip pāṭīrē.
   kulōttuṅkaṉaip pāṭik kuṟṟutal
   528. kavaṉa neṭumpari vīrataraṉ
   kāviri nāṭuṭai yāṉirutōḷ
   avaṉi cumantamai pāṭīrē
   aravu tavirntamai pāṭīrē.
   cērar pāṇṭiyarai veṉṟamai kūṟik kuṟṟutal
   529. maṉṉar purantaraṉ vāḷapayaṉ
   vāraṇam iṅku matampaṭavē
   teṉṉar uṭaintamai pāṭīrē
   cērar uṭaintamai pāṭīrē.
   cērar pāṇṭiyar vaṇaṅkiyatu kūṟik kuṟṟutal
   530. vaṇaṅkiya cērar maṇimuṭiyum
   vaḻutiyar taṅkaḷ maṇimuṭiyum
   piṇaṅkiya cēvaṭi pāṭīrē
   perumāṉ tiruvaṭi pāṭīrē.
   vaṭaaracarai aṭippaṭuttiyatu kūṟikkuṟṟutal
   531. oḷiṟu neṭumpaṭai vāḷapayaṟ
   kuttara pūmiyar iṭṭatiṟaik
   kaḷiṟu varumpaṭi pāṭīrē
   kaṭamata nāṟuva pāṭīrē.
   kaṭaṟṟīvakattu veṉṟikoṇṭa taṉmai kūṟik kuṟṟutal
   532. pauvam aṭaṅka vaḷainta kuṭaip
   paṇṭita cōḻaṉ malarkkaḻalil
   tevvar paṇintamai pāṭīrē
   cilaiyā ṭiyavali pāṭīrē.
   ulakam makiḻa āṭcipurital kūṟik kuṟṟutal
   533. eṟṟaip pakaliṉum veḷḷaṇināḷ
   irunilap pāvai niḻaluṟṟa
   koṟṟak kuṭaiyiṉaip pāṭīrē.
   kulōttuṅkaṉ cōḻaṉaip pāṭīrē.
   karuṇākaraṉaip pāṭik kuṟṟiyatu
   534. vaṇṭai vaḷampati pāṭīrē
   mallaiyum kacciyum pāṭīrē
   paṇṭai mayilaiyum pāṭīrē
   pallavar tōṉṟalaip pāṭīrē.
   ituvum atu
   535. kāṭṭiya vēḻa aṇivārik
   kaliṅkap paraṇinaṅ kāvalaṉmēṟ
   cūṭṭiya tōṉṟalaip pāṭīrē
   toṇṭaiyar vēntaṉaip pāṭīrē.
   mīṇṭum kulōttuṅkaṉai pāṭik kuṟṟiyatu
   536. iṭaipārttuk tiṟaikāṭṭi iṟaivitirup puruvattiṉ
   kaṭaipārttut talaivaṇaṅkum katirmuṭinū ṟāyiramē.
   pallaracarum aṭivaṇaṅkal kūṟik kuṟṟiyatu
   537. muṭicūṭum muṭiyoṉṟē mutalapayaṉ eṅkōmāṉ
   aṭicūṭum muṭiyeṇṇil āyiranū ṟāyiramē.
   pakaivēntar aḻintamai kūṟik kuṟṟutal
   538. muṭiyiṉāl vaḻipaṭṭu moḻintatiṟai iṭāvēntar
   aṭiyiṉāl mitipaṭṭa aruvarainū ṟāyiramē.
   māṟṟaracar oḷi iḻanta taṉmai kūṟik kuṟṟiyatu
   539. tārvēynta puyattapayaṉ taṉṉamaiccar kaṭaittalaiyil
   pārvēntar paṭukiṉṟa paripavamnū ṟāyiramē.
   maṟaivaḷarttamai kūṟik kuṟṟiyatu
   540. tāṅkārap puyattapayaṉ taṇṇaḷiyāl puyalvaḷarkkum
   ōṅkāra mantiramum oppilanū ṟāyiramē.
   ulakamuḻutum āṇṭa mēṉmai kūṟik kuṟṟiyatu
   541. pōrtāṅkum kaḷiṟṟapayaṉ puyamiraṇṭum ennāḷum
   pārtāṅkap parantīrnta paṇippaṇamnū ṟāyiramē.
   kulōttuṅkaṉ tirumālēyākak kūṟik kuṟṟiyatu
   542. nāṟkaṭalaik kavittakuṭai naratuṅkaṉ amutameḻap
   pāṟkaṭalaik kaṭaintaruḷum paṇaippuyamnū ṟāyiramē.
   ituvum atu
   543. tāḷiraṇṭāl nilavēntar talaitāṅkum cayatuṅkaṉ
   tōḷiraṇṭāl vāṇaṉaimuṉ tuṇittatōḷ āyiramē.
   ituvum atu
   544. cūḻimukak kaḷiṟṟapayaṉ tūtunaṭan taruḷiyanāḷ
   āḻimutaṟ paṭaiyeṭutta aṇineṭuntō ḷāyiramē.
   kuṟṟiya ariciyaip puṭaittal
   545. pallarici yāvumikap paḻavarici tāmākac
   callavaṭṭam eṉuñcuḷakāl taviṭupaṭap puṭaiyīrē.
   puṭaitta ariciyai aḷattal
   546. pāṇikaḷāl nilantiruttip paṭaikkaliṅkar aṇipakaḻit
   tūṇikaḷē nāḻikaḷāt tūṇimā aḷavīrē.
   aḷanta ariciyai ulaiyiliṭal
   547. viraṟpuṭṭi lavaiciṟiya viṟkūṭai periyaṉakoṇṭu
   uraṟpaṭṭa aricimukantu ulaikaḷtoṟum coriyīrē.
   ulaiyiliṭṭa aracikkut tuṭuppum akappaiyum
   548. kaḷapparaṇik kūḻpoṅki vaḻiyāmal kaituṭuppā
   aḷappariya kuḷappukkāl akappaikaḷāk koḷḷīrē.
   aṭṭa kūḻaip patam pārttal
   549. vaippuk kāṇu namakkiṉṟu
   vārīr kūḻai ellīrum
   uppup pārkka orutuḷḷi
   uḷḷaṅ kaiyiṟ koḷḷīrē.
   venta kūḻai naṉku kiṇṭutal
   550. aḻalaik kaiyiṟ koḷḷāmē
   aṭuppai avittuk kaittuṭuppāṟ
   cuḻalac cuḻalap puṭaieṅkum
   tuḻāvit tuḻāvik koḷḷīrē.
   kaiyāṟ patam pārttuk kūḻai iṟakkal
   551. paṟṟip pārīr iṉikkūḻiṉ
   patamum cuvaiyum paṇṭuṇṭa
   maṟṟaik kūḻiṉ mikanaṉṟu
   vārīr iḻicca vārīrē.
   ituvum atu
   552. eṭuttuk kaikaḷ vēkāmē
   ivuḷit tuṇiyiṭṭu irumaruṅkum
   aṭittup piṭittu mettaṉavē
   aṭuppi ṉiṉṟum iḻiccīrē.
   kūḻiṉ mikuti
   553. oruvāy koṇṭē itutolaiya
   uṇṇa voṇṇātu eṉṟeṉṟu
   veruvā niṉṟīr āyiramvāy
   vēṇṭu mōik kūḻuṇavē.
   ituvum atu
   554. venta irumpiṟ pukumpuṉalpōl
   ventīp paciyāl ventueriyum
   intaviṭampai nāttōykkil
   ikkū ḻellām cuvaṟātō.
   ituvum atu
   555. paṇṭu mikumō paraṇikkūḻ
   pāra kattil aṟiyēmō
   uṇṭu mikumō nīrcoṉṉa
   upāyam ituvum ceykuvamē.
   uṇavukkumuṉ nīr vaittukkoḷḷutal
   556. vempum kurutip pērāṟṟil
   vēṇṭum taṇṇīr vēḻattiṉ
   kumpaṅ kaḷilē mukanteṭuttuk
   kuḷira vaittuk koḷḷīrē.
   uṇavukoḷḷa nilam tiruttal
   557. cōrum kaḷiṟṟiṉ vālatiyāl
   cuḻala alakiṭṭu alaikuruti
   nīrun teḷittuk kalamvaikka
   nilamē camaittuk koḷḷīrē.
   uṇkalam amaittal
   558. pōrmaṇ ṭalikar kēṭakattiṉ
   puḷakac ciṉṉam parappīrē
   pārmaṇ ṭalikar talaimaṇṭai
   palamaṇ ṭaikaḷāk koḷḷīrē.
   ituvum atu
   559. aḻinta kaliṅkar poṟparicai
   avaipoṟ kalamāk koḷḷīrē
   viḻunta tavaḷak kuṭaimiṉṉum
   veḷḷik kalamāk koḷḷīrē.
   kūḻaip paṅkiṭak karuvi koṇṭatu
   560. nilattaic camaittuk koḷḷīrē
   neṭuṅkaik kaḷiṟṟiṉ iruceviyām
   kalattiṟ koḷḷak kuṟaiyāta
   kalaṅkaḷ perukkik koḷḷīrē.
   pakal viḷakkum pāvāṭaiyum
   561. katampeṟ ṟārkkum ceṟunarviḻik
   kaṉalum niṇamum aṇaṅkiṉpāl
   patampeṟ ṟārkkup pakalviḷakkum
   pāvā ṭaiyumāk koḷḷīrē.
   uṇavu koḷḷa aḻaittatu
   562. paricu paṭavē kalamparappip
   panti panti paṭauṅkaḷ
   varicai yuṭaṉē iruntuṇṇa
   vārīr kūḻai vārīrē.
   uṇavupaṭaikka akappai koḷḷal
   563. kaṅkā puriyiṉ matiṟpuṟattuk
   karutār cirampōy mikavīḻa
   iṅkē talaiyiṉ vēlpāynta
   ivaimū ḻaikaḷāk koḷḷīrē.
   maṭaiyarkaḷait tērnteṭuttal
   564. kiṭaikkap porutu maṇalūril
   kīḻnāḷ aṭṭa paraṇikkūḻ
   paṭaittup payiṉṟa maṭaippēykaḷ
   panti tōṟum vārīrē.
   piccai ēṟkum pārppaṉap pēykkuk kūḻaḷittal
   565. avati illāc cuvaikkūḻ kaṇṭu
   aṅkāntu aṅkāntu aṭikkaṭiyum
   pavati piṭcān tēkiyeṉum
   paṉavap pēykku vārīrē.
   camaṇpēykaṭkuk kūḻ vārttal
   566. uyiraik kollāc camaṇpēykaḷ
   orupōḻ tuṇṇum avaiyuṇṇa
   mayiraip pārttu niṇattukilāl
   vaṭittuk kūḻai vārīrē.
   puttappēykkuk kūḻ vārttal
   567. muḻuttōl pōrkkum puttappēy
   mūḷaik kūḻai nākkuḻaṟak
   kaḻuttē kiṭṭa maṉantiriyāk
   kañci yāka vārīrē.
   pārvaip pēykkuk kūḻ vārttal
   568. koyta iṟaicci uṟuppaṉaittum
   koḷḷuṅ kūḻai veḷḷāṭṭiṉ
   paital iṟaicci tiṉṟularnta
   pārvaip pēykku vārīrē.
   kuruṭṭup pēykaḷukkuk kūḻ vārttal
   569. ūṇā tarikkum kaḷḷappēy
   oḷittuk koṇṭa kalantaṭavik
   kāṇātu araṟṟuṅ kuruṭṭuppēy
   kaikkē kūḻai vārīrē.
   ūmaip pēykkuk kūḻ vārttal
   570. paiyāp pōṭu pacikāṭṭip
   patalai niṟainta kūḻkāṭṭik
   kaiyāl uraikkum ūmaippēy
   kaikkē kūḻai vārīrē.
   cūṟpēykkuk kūḻ vārttal
   571. aṭainta cevikaḷ tiṟantaṉavāl
   aṭiyēṟku eṉṟu kaṭaivāyait
   tuṭaittu nakkic cuvaikāṇum
   cūṟpēykku iṉṉum coriyīrē.
   aṟivaṟṟa pēykku kūḻvārttal
   572. pollā ōṭṭaik kalattukkūḻ
   puṟattē oḻuka maṟittuppārttu
   ellāṅ kaviḻttut tikaittirukkum
   iḻutaip pēykku vārīrē.
   nōkkap pēykkuk kūḻ vārttal
   573. tutikkait tuṇiyaip palliṉmēṟ
   cevvē niṟuttit tutikkaiyiṉ
   nutikkē kūḻai vāreṉṉum
   nōkkap pēykku vārīrē.
   kūttip pēykku kūḻ vārttal
   574. taṭiyāṉ maṭuttuk kūḻellām
   tāṉē parukit taṉkaṇavaṉ
   kuṭiyāṉ eṉṟu tāṉkuṭikkum
   kūttip pēykku vārīrē.
   viruntāka vanta pēykkuk kūḻaruttal
   575. varukūḻp paraṇik kaḷaṅkaṇṭu
   vanta pēyai muṉṉūṭṭi
   orukūḻp paraṇi nāmirukkum
   ūrkkaṭ pēykku vārīrē.
   kaṉavu kaṇṭuraitta pēykku iraṭṭaippaṅku koṭuttal
   576. iravu kaṉavu kaṇṭapēykku
   iṟṟaik kaṉṟi nāḷaikkum
   puravi urittōṟ paṭṭaikkē
   kūḻaip potintu vaiyīrē.
   kaṇakkup pēykkuk kūḻ vārttal
   577. iṇakkam illā namaiyellām
   eṇṇik kaṇṭēm eṉṟuraikkum
   kaṇakkap pēykkum akaṅkaḷikkak
   kaiyāl eṭuttu vārīrē.
   pēykaḷ uṇṇutal
   578. meṉkuṭar veḷḷaiku taṭṭīrē
   melviral iñciya tukkīrē
   muṉkaiye lumpiṉai mellīrē
   mūḷaiyai vārivi ḻuṅkīrē.
   ituvum atu
   579. aḷḷiya rukirun tuṇṇīrē
   arintiṭu tāmarai moṭṭeṉṉum
   uḷḷika ṟittukkoṇ ṭuṇṇīrē
   ūtiva raṉṟikkoṇ ṭuṇṇīrē.
   ituvum atu
   580. tamakkoru vāyoṭu vāymūṉṟum
   tāmiṉi tāppaṭait tukkoṇṭu
   namakkoru vāytanta nāṉmukaṉār
   nāṇum paṭikaḷit tuṇṇīrē.
   ituvum atu
   581. ōṭi uṭalviyart tuṇṇīrē
   unti paṟantiḷait tuṇṇīrē
   āṭi acaintacain tuṇṇīrē
   aṟṟa taṟavaṟin tuṇṇīrē.
   uṇṭavāy pūcal
   582. kotitta kariyiṉ kumpattuk
   kuḷirnta taṇṇīr taṉaimoṇṭu
   potutta toḷaiyāl pukamaṭuttup
   pucitta vāyaip pūcīrē.
   uṇṭapiṉ veṟṟilaipākku ayilutal
   583. paṇṇum ivuḷic ceviccuruḷum
   paraṭṭiṟ piḷavum paṭukaliṅkar
   kaṇṇiṉ maṇiyiṟ cuṇṇāmpum
   kalantu maṭittut tiṉṉīrē.
   pēruṇṭi koṇṭa kuṟṟamoḻiya maruntu
   584. perukkat tiṉṟīr tāmpūlam
   piḻaikkac ceytīr piḻaippīrē
   cerukkum pēykāḷ pūtattiṉ
   cirattiṉ mayirai mōvīrē.
   pēykaḷ kaḷittuk kūttāṭal
   585. eṉṟuka ḷittuk kumaṇṭaiyiṭṭē
   ēppa miṭṭup paruttuniṉṟa
   kuṉṟuku ṉippaṉa pōṟkaḷattuk
   kumpiṭ ṭēnaṭa miṭṭaṉavē
   ituvum atu
   586. vāciki ṭakkak kaliṅkarōṭa
   māṉataṉ ēviya cēṉaivīrar
   tūciye ḻuntamai pāṭi niṉṟu
   tūciyum iṭṭuniṉ ṟāṭiṉavē.
   ituvum atu
   587. porukai tavirntu kaliṅkarōṭap
   pōka purantaraṉ viṭṭataṇṭiṉ
   irukaiyum veṉṟatōr veṉṟipāṭi
   irukaiyum vīciniṉ ṟāṭiṉavē.
   pēykaḷ kaḷittu viḷaiyāṭal
   588. vaḻutiyar varaimuḻai nuḻaivaṭi vitueṉa
   matakari vayiṟukaḷ pukanuḻai vaṉacila
   eḻutiya cilaiyavar ceṟikaṭal viḻumavai
   itueṉa vaḻikuru tiyiṉviḻu vaṉacila.
   ituvum atu
   589. uruviya curikaiyo ṭuyarkaṇai viṭupaṭai
   uruḷvaṭi vituveṉa uruḷvaṉa cilacila
   veruviya viṭunartam uṭaivaṭi vituveṉa
   viritalai yataṉoṭu maṟivaṉa cilacila.
   pēykaḷ kulōttuṅkaṉai vāḻttal
   590. upaya meṉumpiṟap pāḷarētta
   uraitta kaliṅkar tamaiveṉṟa
   apayaṉ aruḷiṉaip pāṭiṉavē
   aṇiceṟi tōḷiṉai vāḻttiṉavē.
   ituvum atu
   591. ticaiyiṟ palanara pālarmuṉṉē
   terinturaik kuñcicu pālaṉvaita
   vacaiyil vayappukaḻ vāḻttiṉavē
   maṉukula tīpaṉai vāḻttiṉavē.
   ituvum atu
   592. poṉṉit tuṟaivaṉai vāḻttiṉavē
   porunaik karaiyaṉai vāḻttiṉavē
   kaṉṉik koḻunaṉai vāḻttiṉavē
   kaṅkai maṇāḷaṉai vāḻttiṉavē.
   ituvum atu
   593. āḻikaḷ ēḻumor āḻiyiṉkīḻ
   aṭippaṭa vanta akaliṭattai
   ūḻito ṟūḻiyuṅ kāttaḷikkum
   ulakuyya vantāṉai vāḻttiṉavē.
   karikālac cōḻaṉōṭu oppiṭṭup pēykaḷ vāḻttiyatu
   594. pūppatu mattaṉ paṭaittamaitta
   puviyai iraṇṭā vatumpaṭaittuk
   kāppatum eṉkaṭaṉ eṉṟukātta
   karikālac cōḻaṉai vāḻttiṉavē.
   vāḻttuk kūṟiyatu
   595. yāva rumkaḷi ciṟakkavē tarumam
   eṅkum eṉṟumuḷa tākavē
   tēvar iṉṉaruḷ taḻaikkavē muṉivar
   ceyta vappayaṉ viḷaikkavē.
   ituvum atu
   596. vēta naṉṉeṟi parakkavē apayaṉ
   veṉṟa veṅkali karakkavē
   pūta lampukaḻ parakkavē puvi
   nilaikka vēpuyal curakkavē.
   --------------
     __________________________________________________________________

   This file was last updated on 12 June 2020.
   Feel free to send the corrections to the webmaster.

References

   1. https://www.projectmadurai.org/
