                                   pm logo
                     ___________________________________

                       kōtai nācciyār tālāṭṭu
                          āṅkila moḻipeyarppu
                              kaucalyā hārṭ
                           kOtai nAcciyAr tAlaTTu,
                             English translation
                            by Dr. Kausalya Hart
                    In Tamil script, unicode/utf-8 format
     __________________________________________________________________

   Acknowledgements:
   We thank Dr. Kausalya Hart for providing a soft copy of this
   translation and for the permissions
   to include this work as part of Project Madurai collections.
   Preparation of HTML and PDF versions: Dr. K. Kalyanasundaram, Lausanne,
   Switzerland.
   © Project Madurai, 1998-2023.
   Project Madurai is an open, voluntary, worldwide initiative devoted to
   preparation
   of electronic texts of Tamil literary works and to distribute them free
   on the Internet.
   Details of Project Madurai are available at the website
   https://www.projectmadurai.org/
   You are welcome to freely distribute this file, provided this header
   page is kept intact.
     __________________________________________________________________

                       kōtai nācciyār tālāṭṭu
                          āṅkila moḻipeyarppu
                              kaucalyā hārṭ

   Source :
   kōtai nācciyār tālāṭṭu
   ( āciriyar yār eṉa teriyavillai)
   S. vaiyāpurip piḷḷai upacarittatu
   āḻvār tiru nakari tiruñāṉamuttiraip piracurālayam
   patippāciriyar periyaṉ srī nivācaṉ
   1928, kāppiraiṭ, vilai, 0.40 paicā
   srīāṉantavināyakar acckam, srīvaikuṇṭam
   [1]https://www.projectmadurai.org/pm_etexts/utf8/pmuni0112.html
   ---------------------

                           Kodainachiyar Thaalaatu
                             lullaby for Andal.

   Worshiping God K
   I bow to the two feet of the famous king Senaiyar
   stays in the divine temple of Kannan in Puduvai
   where dark clouds float.
   I will compose a lullaby for the beautiful Kodai
   so that the people of the world may sing it and praise her..
   Book.
   1. I worship the divine feet of Vishnuchithan in Puduvai city
   and compose a lullaby that all people can sing happily for Kodai
   Srirangam the divine city
   2 - 5. I worship Srirangam where Perumal abides, flourishing with palm
   and kamugu trees.
   I bow to his feet and they are my help.
   Srirangam is filled with beautiful temples and large towers.
   From the tops of its hills, one can see clouds, lotus ponds and
   beautiful golden temples that beautify the city.
   Beautiful statues in the temple are ornamented with nine jewels
   and sandalwood chariots always run on the streets.
   The music that is played on the street.
   6 - 7. Many rishis and Brahmins, scholars of Vedas,
   sing and praise the beauty of Thirumal the god of Srirangam and his
   wife.
   8. Poets praise Perumal, the god Manivannan, with love
   singing his praise every day.
   9. Women sing and with them the conches of Achudan blow with beautiful
   music.
   10 - 11 The sound of the veena resounds everywhere,
   drums are beaten and bells ring.
   These sound all over the good streets of the city
   and people wander everywhere happily.
   12. The music instruments perihai, ekkalam and sekandi resound
   everywhere.
   13. Tumpuru and Naradar play the flute
   and sing in the divine temple with their beautiful voices.
   14. Indra and the gods have brought fragrant flowers.
   Devotees from all the eight directions have come to worship
   and they sing the praise of the god, bowing to him.
   15. Bees sing, peacocks dance
   and the devotees sing the praise of the god and worship him.
   16. Singers who know how to sing songs with the right ragas
   praise god with the Pallaandu.
   The fragrance of shenbaga flowers spreads all over the god’s temple.
   17. Indra and the gods sprinkle lovely flowers
   and the moon and sun wave chowries.
   18. Singers walk in procession reciting the Thiruvaaymozhi
   in the city that is filled with tall palaces, towers and temples that
   are ornamented with jewels.
   19. In the fields, paddy flourishes making rice abundant.
   Beautiful kuvalai blossoms bloom everywhere.
   Women who walk like swans sit and write love letters to their beloveds.
   20. The wind makes the sugarcane sway
   and the lotus flowers bloom in the ponds.
   Bees buzz like flutes.
   Peacocks open their feathers and dance.
   21. Ripe mangos hang from the trees
   and monkeys jump all over the branches.
   Honeycombs are filled by the bees
   and the honey spills all over.
   22. Good paddy grows and the world flourishes with rice.
   Sugarcane plants thrive, and kamuka trees give abundant fruit.
   23. On the tops of the peaks of the mountains, cruel tigers live.
   Bees see the moon and, thinking it is a ball of food, fly to reach it.
   24. Three times a month rain falls. The champa paddy grows well in the
   rain
   and ponds are filled with water and overflow.
   25. Banana trees ripen with fruits,
   jackfruit trees grow everywhere,
   thaazai flowers bloom and sprinkle their petals.
   26. Punnai flowers bloom and the parrots speak with each other
   while swans talk, swimming in the ponds.
   27. Lovely waterfalls descending from the hills flow and fill the
   ponds.
   Such is honey-like Puduvai city surrounded with paddy fields.
   28. South Puduvai is rich
   with corals, diamonds, green emeralds and pearls.
   29. There many pandals hide the sunlight
   and flourishing gardens spread fragrance.
   30. Coconut trees open their leaves beautifully.
   Sweet sugarcane plants flourish everywhere and punnai trees touch the
   clouds.
   The divine birth of Goda
   31. The priest, the famous Vishnuchithan,
   planted in his flower garden many fragrant thulasi and mullai plants.
   32. He watered them well and grew them happily.
   33. One day he heard the sound of the earth splitting open
   and went to see what was happening.
   34. He found a baby girl under a beautiful thulasi plant
   on that Adippuram day.
   35. Vishnuchithan took the girl, beautiful as a lotus, in his arms,
   and asked her, “Dear one, tell me what I can do for you?”
   36. The baby said, “Father, I am your dear daughter
   and I am the blooming thulasi.”
   37, Vishnuchithan heard this and was pleased.
   He carried his divine child into the sacred temple.
   38. He placed the girl under the golden feet
   of the god Manivannan adorned with a thulasi garland.
   She crawled, played and wandered around.
   39. Vishnuchithan looked at Perumal and asked him,
   “O god Perumal, why did I find this girl? Tell me.”
   40. The god Manivannan told Vishunuchithar,
   “This beautiful girl is the goddess,
   41. “Name her Thirukkodai Nacciyar
   and take her to your home happily.”
   42. Vishnuchithan obeyed Perumal’s words,
   took the beautiful girl in his arms and gave her to the foster mothers.
   43. The foster mothers fed the baby milk,
   put her in the cradle lovingly and raised her joyfully.
   44.,45. They sang a lullaby: “O girls, listen.
   Brahma sent with love this small beautiful cradle made of pure gold
   studded with diamonds and rubies.
   Thaaleloo thaaleloo, O girl, Thaaleloo thaaleloo.
   46. “You are a pretty swan, sweet as honey,
   a beautiful girl who shines like gold,
   you are a deer and a peacock.
   Thaaleloo thaaleloo,
   47. “You shine like gold,
   you are beautiful like a peacock in the forest,
   you are a cuckoo bird in a garden,
   you are a tender mango leave,
   you are lightning, the light of a lamp,
   and the divine Veda.
   Thaaleloo thaaleloo,”
   48. “You, queen among women,
   were born to the childless Periyaazvar
   and you are a gift to him.
   Thaaleloo thaaleloo,
   49. “Now no one in the world can call the foster mothers childless.”
   50. They praised Kothai who was born in Puduvai city
   surrounded with flowers.
   51. “You are as precious as our eyes,
   you are dear,
   you are the Karpaga tree in Indra’s palace,
   you are sweet as clear nectar.
   Beloved girl, you are a divine daughter,
   you are an innocent girl.
   Thaaleloo thaalelo.
   52. “You are beautiful as a deer,
   you are a cuckoo bird,
   you are a buzzing bee,
   you are a star,
   you are honey,
   you are the sacred water used to bathe Kama.
   you are clear nectar.
   Thaaleloo thaalelo.
   53. “The gods in the sky worship you.
   O emerald, you are a fine daughter
   who came to remove the troubles of all.
   Thaaleloo thaalelo.
   54. “You, a precious emerald, a bright light,
   were born in a garden blooming with flowers.
   Thaaleloo thaaleloo,”
   55. “You, lovely child, sweet nectar, were found
   by Periyazvar in a garden of flowers
   dripping with honey, swarming with bees.
   Thaaleloo thaalelo.
   56. “You are a swan,
   a deer found by Periyaazvar in Puduvai city
   rich with pearls where good paddy flourishes.
   Thaaleloo thaalelo.”
   57. They sang this lullaby for Kothai,
   born like Sita to Azvar, the scholar of the Vedas.
   58. “You are a pearl, a coral, a lovely parrot, a beautiful girl.
   You are like a tender plant for Azwar,
   the light of a lamp and the divine Vedas.
   Thaaleloo, Thaaleloo.
   59. “You are clear nectar,
   you gave the flower garland
   that decorates the highest god praised by all.
   Thaaleloo thaalelo.
   60. “You, the sweet honey-like baby,
   were found on the ground when you were five years old.
   Thaaleloo thaalelo.
   61. “Lovingly, you called Periyazvar, ‘Father, father!’
   You fulfilled his desire for a child.
   Thaaleloo thaalelo.
   62. “You are an emerald,
   your eyes are adorned with kohl,
   you are the daughter of the earth,
   born to Poyhai Mudal Azvar.
   Thaaleloo thaalelo.
   63. “You, sweet nectar, have been chosen by the gods
   to be the bride for the god who measured the world.
   Thaaleloo thaalelo.”
   64,65. The foster mothers praised their dear daughter,
   who would love Vishnu Narayanan and marry him.
   66. “You are nectar born as a boon to Azwar. Thaaleloo thaalelo.”
   The foster mothers placed her in a swing, singing a lullaby, their
   hearts melting.
   67. “Your father sings the Bhagavatham and praises Vishnu.
   You were born to him to fulfill his desire for a child,
   O child precious as gold. Thaaleloo thaalelo.
   68. “You are a dear swan born to Vishnuchithan
   of south Puduvai. Thaaleloo thaalelo.
   69. “Azhvar, the good Brahmin, recites all the sastras.
   You were born to him, worshiped him and made his life shine.
   Thaaleloo thaalelo.
   70. “You, a beautiful swan, were born
   to Azvar who lives in Puduvai surrounded with banana plants.
   Thaaleloo thaalelo.
   71. “You are the precious daughter born to the Azwar
   of Puthuvai city where clouds float and sugarcane flourishes.
   He sings always Tamil songs to the god Vishnu.
   Thaaleloo thaalelo.”
   72. The foster mothers praised Kothai, the best of women,
   who was born at an auspicious time to the Azvar who sings the Pallandu.
   73. “O Kothai, you are a precious girl
   born to Azwar so his family would be happy for seven generations
   and he would not suffer because he did not have a child.
   Thaaleloo thaalelo.”
   Kothai growing up
   74. He raised Kothai happily every day.
   One day Vishnuchithan made a garland with beautiful flowers.
   75. Kothai took the garland made by her father,
   wore it, looked at it and put it back. Then she went off to play.
   76. Vishunuchithar finished all his morning prayers
   and decided to go to the temple.
   77. He wanted to decorate the god with the garland
   but when he took it in his hands, he saw a hair on it.
   78. Thinking it might be his daughter’s hair, he showed it to her.
   Finding out that it was she who had worn the garland,
   he was distressed and went back to the garden.
   79. He lovingly picked new flowers
   made a new garland and decorated the god with it.
   80. At night god Manivannan came before Azwar and asked him,
   “Today the flower garland does not have any fragrance. What happened,
   Azwar?”
   81. Azwar folded his hands, bowed to the god and said,
   “My daughter, beautiful Kodai, wore the garland I made and placed it in
   the basket.
   82. “I put that garland away, made a new garland with beautiful flowers
   and brought it to adorn you.”
   83. Manivannan heard this and was happy.
   “This is marvelous, but let me tell you something.
   84. “Your lovely daughter wore the garland,
   looked at herself in the mirror,
   took it off and placed it in the basket every day.
   85. “O Azvar, that is the garland you always bring
   to decorate me.
   86. “From today pluck fresh flowers,
   make a beautiful garland,
   87. “and after Kothai has worn it in her hair,
   bring it to me. Let this be known to all the world.
   88. “She will be praised by songs, music and instruments
   and you will be famous as the father of Kothai
   who will be called Suudikoduttal.”
   89. The god Manivannan said this and left.
   Azvar raised his daughter happily.
   90. He bathed Kothai, decorated her hair,
   and smeared dark kohl on her eyes.
   91. His relatives and close friends,
   came to his home and asked for Kothai in marriage.
   92. Holding his beautiful daughter on his lap,
   Vishnuchithan gave the garland to her.
   93. He told his relatives,
   ‘I will give my daughter to one of your sons.
   Let him garland her happily and marry her.
   She will be his wife with him in your home.”
   94. Kothai heard the words of her father,
   thought it is good that he was speaking of her marriage, and told him,
   95. “No man from this world can be my husband.
   I will marry only Azagar who saves all people
   and stays on the mountain surrounded by flourishing groves.
   96. “He will be my husband and no one else can marry me.
   Send people to find him.”
   97. Hearing Kothai’s words, all Azvar’s relatives
   searched many places for Azhagar.
   98. After the relatives of Vishnuchithan left,
   he raised his wise daughter like a beautiful peacock happily.
   99. Kothai decided to do a nombu for Manivannan.
   100. She went to Azvar, said that she wanted to do a nombu
   and told him all the things that she needed for it.
   101. Pleased, Azwar listened, asked the Brahmins to do the nombu
   and gave them the money for the ritual.
   102. After Azwar agreed to Kothai’s performing her nombu,
   she began, bathing every day.
   103. She brought flowers every day, worshiped and praised Mayavan
   and did nombu to marry him.
   104. She bathed every day in the month of Markazhi
   and sang Thiruppavai songs without making mistakes.
   105. She played on a small drum, made a garland,
   wore it and gave it to the statue of the god,
   worshiping him and always thinking of him.
   106. But Mayavan did not come to her, did not give her a garland,
   and did not send anyone to give her news.
   107. She worried and spoke to her friends,
   “I don’t know what wrong I have done.
   O friends with faces as lovely as the moon, tell me.”
   108. Her friends told her,
   “The divine lord of Venkatam in the north
   will come with his discus and marry you in a wonderful way.”
   109. Kothai was happy when her friend said this.
   She sent an andril bird, a cuckoo bird or a cloud every day as a
   messenger.
   110. Manivannan did not send her anything.
   Distressed, she thought, “The divine Venkatavan has not answered me.
   I cannot remain like this,” and she was very sad.
   111. Kothai was unhappy and suffered,
   and her friends went to Azwar.
   112. Azwar, the devotee of Achudan,
   heard what Kothai’s friends said and was worried.
   113. He thought, “I should not keep my daughter Kothai
   who gave me the pleasure of having a child
   without getting her married. It will not be good.”
   114. He selected a good day
   and went to Srirangan to worship Kannan
   with his daughter on a palanquin.
   115. Walking to Srirangam, he reached its boundary,
   116. He took a bath in the Kaveri river in the south.
   He prayed for a long time
   and returned to care for his daughter.
   117. He searched for her but could not find her on the palanquin.
   All the people around told him they had not see her.
   118. He worried and suffered in his heart
   wondering who could have taken his daughter.
   He looked for her everywhere
   and entered the divine temple of Srirangam.
   119. He spoke to lovely-eyed Perumal,
   “You are the Mayan who measured the world.
   I have only one daughter. You have taken her and hidden her.”
   120. The god of Srirangam, feeling compassion,
   went near Vishnuchithan and bowed to him.
   121. Kothai who was there came, leaving the feet of Manivannan,
   and worshiped the divine feet of Vishnuchithan.
   122. Vishnuchithan happily blessed his daughter
   and Manivannan the god of Srirangam.
   123. He praised Kothai and Manivannan and blessed them.
   He told his daughter, “Marry the beautiful god who sleeps on the
   ocean.”
   124. He happily said to the god Rangan
   “You are my son-in-law. Come and marry my daughter.”
   125. They were married on Purnima day
   in the month of Punguni under the star Utthira
   and planted some seeds in pots.
   126. He happily invited the god Rangan and beautiful Kothai
   to come to his home.
   127. Azvar told Rangan,
   “I am going and will come back with your beautiful daughter
   adorned with flowers in her hair.”
   128. Azvar went to Srivilliputhur and stayed in his palace.
   129- 130. He sent messages to people all over world, writing,
   “I am going to celebrate a beautiful marriage for my daughter.
   Come to the wedding hall and celebrate the wedding.”
   131 to 144. Description of decorations for Kothai’s wedding.
   The sticks for the wedding pandal were made of sugarcane.
   The pandal was made of karpagam
   and banana leaves tied in between sugarcane stalks.
   Lotus flowers were hung
   and the pandal was made of various flowers.
   Mango, jackfruit, and other sweet fruits were hung
   and decorated the hall.
   Various drums were beaten.
   Kaalam and nadaswaram made music.
   The gods sprinkled flowers from the sky,
   and came down to worship the couple.
   Forest people brought flowers, and worshiped the gods.
   Indra sprinkled flowers in all the directions.
   The moon and the sun fanned the couple with chowries.
   The seats were made of diamonds and precious rugs were spread
   in the beautiful mandapam
   and the verandas were made of pure gold.
   The priests performed worship with sacred grass
   and recited the Vedas.
   The place was decorated with purana kumbam and golden pots,
   while Brahmins recited all the four Vedas.
   Perumal arrives
   144. All the people and Azvar waited
   for the divine Perumal to come. He was late.
   145. After crossing a hot forest Rangan arrived in Srivilliputhur.
   Conches were blown when he came.
   146. The bridegroom sat in the wedding hall
   and was married to Kothai at an auspicious time.
   Then he gave many gifts to the Brahmins.
   147. Perumal gave them clothes, jewels and milch cows.
   148. The women of the palace gave beautiful Kothai new clothes,
   and Indrani adorned her with a wedding garland.
   149. Drums were beaten, beautiful conches were blown.
   strings of pearls were hung and the pandal was decorated with corals.
   150. Perumal, holding Kothai’s hands,
   walked around the fire with her.
   151. Azvar poured sacred water on the bride and groom’s hands,
   giving his daughter to Perumal.
   152 - 158. The marriage was celebrated well.
   All were happy and gave sweets and precious things.
   153 to 158.
   After the fire ceremony was finished
   all the people sprinkled rice.
   The Brahmins recited mantras and all the Vedas.
   They spread naanal grass around,
   performed homams, and everywhere flowers were sprinkled.
   Perumal gave coins to the Brahmins as gifts.
   After the bride and the groom went around the fire
   they came to their palace.
   159. Narayanan is the help for this birth and all
   the fourteen births for everyone.
   160. She put her feet on the grinding stone
   and looked at the star Arundadi.
   161- 163. Holding his hand,
   she walked on the rice at the entrance of the house
   The Brahmins threw rice as they entered their bedroom.
   She gave her husband betal leaves and nuts and he joined her on the
   beautiful bed.
   164 -166. Azwar heard about all these things and was happy.
   He thought such a beautiful marriage had never happened anywhere.
   He was happy with Kannan and praised him, saying, “May Kannan live
   long.”
   Then he sang Mangalam, describing the beauty of Perumal’s discus and
   praising him.
   167 - 168. May the Brahmins of Puduvai city prosper.
   May the god whose color is like the ocean’s and Azwar prosper.
   May all women prosper.
   May all temples prosper.
   May women like Seetha prosper.
   May all people in the world live happily.
   Kothai Nachiyar Thalattu ends.
   --------------

                       kōtai nācciyār tālāṭṭu
                    ( āciriyar yār eṉa teriyavillai)

   kāppu
   cīrārnta kōtaiyiṉmēṟ ciṟappākat tālāṭṭap
   pārōr pukaḻanitam pāṭavē vēṇumeṉṟu
   "kārūrnta teṉputuvaik kaṇṇaṉ tirukkōyil
   ērārnta cēṉaiyarkōṉ" iṇaiyaṭiyuṅ kāppāmē.
   nūl
   teṉputuvai viṣṇucittaṉ tiruvaṭiyai nāṉtoḻutu
   iṉpamuṭaṉ tālāṭṭu icaiyuṭaṉē yāṉkūṟat       1
   teṅkamuku mālāṉaic ciṟantōṅkum "srī raṅkam
   nam perumāḷ" pātam namakkē tuṇaiyāmē.       2
   cīrārnta kōyilkaḷum ciṟappākak kōpuramum
   kārārnta mēṭaikaḷum kañcamalar vāvikaḷum       3
   miṉṉār maṇimakuṭam viḷaṅka alaṅkrutamāyp
   poṉṉālē tāṉceyta poṟkōyil taṉṉaḻakum       4
   kōpurattu uṉṉitamum koṭuṅkai navamaṇiyum
   tārpurat taracilaiyum cantaṉat tiruttērum       5
   ārār talattaḻakum ammaṟaiyōr māltiramum
   cīrār taṉattaḻakum ciṟappāṉa utsavamum       6
   vēta maṟaiyōrum mēṉmait talattōrum
   kīta muṟaiyālē kīrttaṉaṅkaḷ tāṉmuḻaṅka       7
   pāvalarkaḷ pāmālai pāṭi maṇivaṇṇaṉ
   āvalāyp pōṟṟi aṉutiṉamum tāṉtutikkak       8
   kaccumulai mātar kavikaḷ palapāṭa
   accutaṉar caṅkam aḻakāl toṉiviḷaṅka       9
   tittiyuṭaṉ vīṇai cakamuḻutun tāṉkēṭka
   mattaḷamuṅ kaimaṇiyum antat taviluṭaṉē       10
   uttamar vīti ulāviyē tāṉ viḷaṅkap
   ......................................................................
         11
   pērikaiyum ekkāḷam piṉpu cekaṇṭimutal
   pūrikai nātam pūlōkam tāṉmuḻaṅkat       12
   tumpuruvum nāratarum tuyyakuḻa leṭuttuc
   cempavaḷa vāyāl tirukkōyil tāṉpāṭa       13
   aṇṭarkaḷ purantiraṉum aḻaku malareṭuttut
   toṇṭarkaḷum eṇṭicaiyun toḻutu paṇintētta       14
   vaṇṭukaḷum pāṭa mayiliṉaṅkaḷ tāṉpāṭat
   toṇṭarkaḷum pāṭat toḻutu paṇintētta       15
   paṇpakarum pāvalarkaḷ pallāṇ ṭicaipāṭa
   ceṇpakappū vācaṉaikaḷ tirukkōyil tāṉvīca       16
   intiraṉum imaiyōrum ilaṅkum malartūvac
   cantiraṉum cūriyaṉuñ cāmaraṅkaḷ tāṉpōṭak       17
   kuṉṟumaṇi māṭaṅkaḷ kōpuraṅkaḷ tāṉtulaṅkac
   ceṉṟuneṭu vītiyilē tiruvāy moḻi viḷaṅka       18
   aṉṉam naṭaipayil arivaiyar maṭaleḻutac
   ceṉṉal kulaicoriyac ceṅkuvaḷai tāṉmalarak       19
   karumpu kalakaleṉak kañca malarvirikkak
   karumpu kuḻalūtat tōkai mayilvirikka       20
   māṅkaṉikaḷ tūṅka manti kutikoḷḷat
   tēṉkūṭu vimmic ceḻittu vaḻintōṭac       21
   ceṉṉal viḷaiyac cekamuḻutum tāṉceḻikkak
   kaṉṉal viḷaiyak kamukamaram tāṉpaḻukka       22
   vempulikaḷ vāḻum mēru cikarattil
   ampulikaik kavaḷameṉṟu tumpi vaḻipaṟikkum       23
   mummāri peytu muḻuc campāt tāṉviḷaiyak
   kammāykaḷ tāṉperukik kavintu vaḻintōṭa       24
   vāḻaiyiṭai paḻuttu varukkaip pilāpaḻuttut
   tāḻaiyum pūttut talaiyālē tāṉcoriyap       25
   puṉṉaiyum pūkkap puṟattē kiḷikūva
   aṉṉamum pēcum aḻakāṉa teṉputuvai       26
   talaiyaruvi pāyum taṭañcūḻnta mukkuḷamum
   malaiyaruvi pāyum vayal cūḻnta teṉputuvaip       27
   pavaḷamuṭaṉ vacciram paccai marakatamum
   tavaḷamoḷi muttut tāṉkoḻikkum teṉputuvaik       28
   kāvaṇaṅkaḷ mēvik katirōṉ taṉaimaṟaikkum
   pūvaṇaṅkaḷ cūḻntu putuvai maṇaṅkamaḻum       29
   teṉṉai maṭalviriyac ceṅkarumpu muttīṉap
   puṉṉai mukiḷviriyap putuvai vaṉantaṉilē       30
   --------------
   tiru avatāram
   cīrāru meṅkaḷviṣṇu cittarnan tāvaṉattil
   ērārun tuḷacimullai yēkamāyt tāṉumvaccu       31
   vacca payirkaḷukku vaḷaravē nīrpāycci
   uccitamāyp payirkaḷcey tukantirukkum vēḷaiyilē;       32
   pūmiviṇṭu kēṭkap pukaḻperuku viṣṇucittaṉ
   pūmiviṇṭa talampārttup pōṉārkāṇ avvēḷai       33
   āṭit tiruppūrattil aḻakāṉa tuḷaciyiṉkīḻ
   nāṭi yutittatiru nāyakiyaic coṉṉārār!       33
   appōtu viṣṇucittaṉ alarmakaḷait tāṉeṭuttuc
   ceppamuṭaṉ "kaṇṇē tiruvāy malarntaruḷvīr"!!       35
   "ayyā umakkaṭiyēṉ arumai makaḷākkum,
   meyyārnta tāyār meṉmait tuḷaci" eṉṟār!!!       36
   appōtu kēṭṭu aruḷap paravacamāyc
   ceppamuṭaṉ peṇṇēntit tirukkōyil tāṉpukuntu;       37
   pūntuḷava maṇivaṇṇaṉ poṉṉaṭikkīḻp peṇṇaiviṭa
   ūrntu viḷaiyāṭi yulāviyē tāṉtiriyap       38
   peṇkoṇarnta viṣṇucittaṉ perumāḷait tāṉōkkip
   'peṇvanta kāraṇameṉ perumāḷē collu" meṉṟār       39
   appōtu maṇivaṇṇaṉ 'aḻakāṉa peṇṇuṉakkuc
   ceppamuṭaṉ vanta tirukkōtai nāyakiyār       40
   eṉṟu pērumiṭṭu eṭuttuk kuḻantaitaṉai
   uṉṟaṉ maṉaikku ukantutāṉ cellum' eṉṟār.       41
   coṉṉamoḻi tappāmal cuntariyait tāṉeṭuttuk
   kaṉṉal moḻi viracaicu kaiyilētāṉ koṭukka       42
   appōtu viracaiyarum amutumulai tāṉkoṭukkac
   ceppamuṭaṉ toṭṭililē cīrāy vaḷaraviṭṭu       43
   māṇikkaṅ kaṭṭivayira miṭaikkaṭṭi
   āṇippoṉ ṉālceyta vaṇṇac ciṟutoṭṭil       44
   pēṇi yuṉakkup piramaṉ viṭutantāṉ
   māṇikkamē tālēlō maṅkaiyarē talēlō,       45
   aṉṉamē tēṉē aḻakē arivaiyarē
   coṉṉamē māṉē tōkaiyarē tālēlō.       46
   poṉṉē puṉamayilē pūṅkuyilē māntuḷirē
   miṉṉē viḷakkoḷiyē vētamē tālēlō,       44
   piḷḷaikaḷum illāta periyāḻvār, taṉakkup
   piḷḷaiviṭāy tīrtta peṇṇaracē tālēlō,       48
   malaṭi viracaiyeṉṟu vaiyakattōr collāmal
   malaṭu taṉait tīrtta maṅkaiyarē tālēlō,       49
   pūvaṉaṅkaḷ cūḻum putuvā puritaṉilē
   kāvaṉattil vantutitta kaṉṉiyaraic coṉṉārār.       50
   kaṇṇēyeṉ kaṇmaṇiyē kaṟpakamē teḷḷamutē
   peṇṇē tirumakaḷē pētaiyarē tālēlō,       51
   māṉē kuyiliṉamē vaṇṭiṉamē tāṟāvē
   tēṉē mataṉāpiṣēkamē teḷḷamutē       52
   vāṉōr paṇiyum marakatamē māmakaḷē
   ēṉōr kalinīṅka iṅkuvanta teḷḷamutē,       53
   pūmalarkaḷ cūḻum pūṅkā vaṉattutitta
   māmakaḷē cōti marakatamē tālēlō,       54
   vaṇṭiṉaṅkaḷ pāṭum matuvoḻukum pūṅkāvil
   paṇṭuperi yāḻvār parinteṭutta teḷḷamutē,       55
   ceṉṉalkaḷai muttīṉṟu ceḻikkum putuvaiyilē
   aṉṉamē māṉē āḻvār tirumakaḷē       56
   "vētaṅka ḷōti veṉṟuvanta āḻvārkkuc
   cītaipōl vantutitta tirumakaḷaic coṉṉārār"!       57
   muttē pavaḷamē mōkaṉamē pūṅkiḷiyē
   vittē viḷakkoḷiyē vētamē tālēlō,       58
   "pāmālai pāṭip paramaṉukku eṉṉāḷum
   pūmālai cūṭip pukaḻtaḷitta teḷḷamutē"!!       59
   añcu vayatil avaṉiyil vantutitta
   piñcāyp paḻutta peṇṇamutē tālēlō,       60
   "entai tantaiyeṉṟu iyampumperi yāḻvārkku
   maintar viṭāytīrtta mātēnī" tālēlō,       61
   "poykaimuta lāḻvārkkum pūmakaḷāy vantutitta
   maiviḻicōti marakatamō" tālēlō!       62
   "ulakaḷanta māyaṉ ukantumaṇam paṇṇat
   tēvāti tēvar teḷinteṭutta teḷḷamutō"!       63
   "collai nilaiyiṭṭa cuntararām āḻvārkkuc
   cellap peṇṇāy" vanta tirumakaḷaic coṉṉārār!       64
   nārāṇaṉai viṣṇuveṉṟu naṇṇumeṅka ḷāḻvārkkuk
   kāraṇamāy vantutitta kaṟpakattaic coṉṉārār!       65
   uḷḷa muruki ūcaliṭum paṭṭarukkup
   piḷḷai viṭāytīrtta peṇṇamutē tālēlō!       66
   pākava tārttam pāṭumeṅka ḷāḻvārkkut
   tākaviṭāy tīrtta taṅkamē tālēlō!       67
   teṉputuvai vāḻum srīviṣṇu tīrttaṉukku
   aṉpuṭaṉē vantutitta aṉṉamē tālēlō!       68
   cāstiraṅkaḷ ōtum catpuruṣaṉ āḻvārkkuc
   cōstirañ ceytu tulaṅkavanta kaṇmaṇiyō!       69
   vāḻaikaḷum cūḻputuvai vāḻumeṅka ḷāḻvārkku
   ēḻaiyāy vantutitta ēntiḻaiyē tālēlō!       70
   kaṉṉalkaḷuñ cūḻputuvai kārkkumeṅka ḷāḻvārkkup
   paṉṉutamiḻ eṉṉāḷum pāṭanalla nāyakamō!       71
   pallāṇṭu pāṭum paṭṭarpirā ṉāḻvārkku
   nallāṇṭil vantutitta nāyakiyaic coṉṉārār!       72
   entākam tīttu ēḻēḻu talaimuṟaikkum
   vantāḷum celva maṅkaiyarē tālēlō!       73
   eṉṟunitam kōtaiyarai eṭuttu vaḷarkkaiyilē;
   'aṉṟorunāḷ viṣṇucittaṉ mutumalar toṭuttuvaikkat,       74
   toṭuttuvaitta malarataṉaic cūṭi niḻalpārttu
   viṭuttuvaittuk kōtaiyarum viḷaiyāṭṭi lētiriya       75
   appōtu viṣṇucittaṉ aṉuṣṭāṉa mutalacey
   teppōtuṅ pōlkōyiṟ kēkavē vēṇumeṉṟu       76
   toṭutta mālaitaṉaic cuvāmikkē cāttaveṉṟu
   eṭuttēku māḻvārum eṉkaiyilē kēcaṅkaṇṭu       77
   peṇṇaraci kōtai kuḻalpōlē yirukkuteṉṟu
   peṇṇāṉa kōtaikkuk kāṭṭiyē tāṉurukkip       78
   piṉpu vaṉampukuntu piriyamāyp pūkkoytu
   aṉpuṭaṉē māyaṉuk kalaṅkāra māyccātta".       79
   appōtu maṇivaṇṇaṉ āḻvārait tāṉpārttu
   "ippōtu maṇaṅkāṇēṉ ētukā ṇāḻvārē"       80
   eṉṟu colla, āḻvārum irukaiyum tāṉkūppit;
   "tuṉṟivaḷak kōtaiyarum cūṭiyē tāṉumvaittāḷ.       81
   ammālai taḷḷi aḻakāṉa pūkkoṇarntu
   naṉmālai koṇṭu nāṉuṉakkuc cāttavantēṉ"       82
   eṉṟucolla, maṇivaṇṇaṉ iṉpamāyt tāṉkēṭṭu,
   "naṉṟāka āḻvārē nāṉuṉakkuc collukiṟēṉ:-       83
   oṉmakaḷum pūccūṭṭi orukkāl niḻalpārttu
   piṉpu kaḷaintu peṭṭiyilē pū vaippāḷ.       84
   ammālai taṉṉai āḻvārē nī rēttuvantu
   immālai cātti yiruntī rituvaraikkum.       85
   iṉṟumutal pūlōka mellān tāṉaṟiya
   aṉṟumalar koytu aḻakākat tāṉtoṭuttuk       86
   kōtai kuḻalcūṭik koṇaruvīr namakkunitam
   kītamē ḷattōṭum kīrttaṉaṅkaḷ taṉṉōṭum       87
   iṉṟumutal cūṭikkoṭuttā ḷivaḷpērum
   naṉṟākattāṉ vāḻttum naṉmaiyē tāṉpeṟuvīr!       88
   eṉṟuraikka maṇivaṇṇaṉ yēkiṉarkāṇ āḻvārum
   ceṉṟuvanta māḷikaiyil ciṟappā yiruntunitam       89
   nīrāṭṭi mayirmuṭittu neṭuvēṟkaṇ maiyeḻuti
   cīrāṭṭik kōtaiyaraic ciṟappāy vaḷarkkaiyilē       90
   ūrār uṟamuṟaiyār uṟṟārkaḷ peṟṟōrkaḷ
   cīrāṉa āḻvāraic ciṟappākap peṇkēḻkka;       91
   appōtu viṣṇucittaṉ aḻakāṉa kōtaiyarai
   ceppamuṭaṉ maṭiyil vaittut tirumālaitāṉ koṭuttu       92
   'uṉakkētam piḷḷaikaṭ kukantē malarcūṭi
   maṉaik kāvalaṉeṉṟum makiḻntētti vāḻum eṉṟār.       93
   avvārttai kēṭṭu aḻakāṉa kōtaiyarum
   cevvāṉa vārttaiyeṉṟu tirumpiyē tāṉuraippāḷ       94
   vaiyam pukaḻayyā māṉiṭavar patiyaṉṟu!
   "uyyum perumāḷ uyarcōlai malaiyaḻakar       95
   ivarkaḷ tāmpati iraṇṭām patiyarillai!!
   avarkaḷ tampāṭṭil aṉuppiyē vaiyum!!! eṉṟār       96
   ivvārttai kēṭṭu iṉattōrellōrum
   cevvāṉa vaṭitēṭit tēcattē pōṉārkaḷ       97
   pōṉapiṉpu viṣṇucittaṉ poṉṉē puṉamayilē
   ñāṉamuṭaṉ vantutitta nāyakiyaic coṉṉārār.       98
   ippaṭik kōtaiyarum iruntu vaḷarukaiyil,
   oppilāḷnōmpu ukantutāṉ nōrkkaveṉṟu       99
   maṇivaṇṇar taṉaittēṭi maṉakkaruttai yavarkkuraittup
   paṇiceyta virutukaḷaip pārippāyt tāṉkēḻkka!       100
   makiḻntu maṇi vaṇṇaṉ maṉamuvantu maṟaiyōrkkup
   pukaḻntutāṉ uttaravu porumutalun tāṉkoṭukka!!       101
   uttaravu vāṅki ulakelān tāṉniṟaiya;
   'n஢ttamoru nōṉpu nēttiyāyt tāṉkuḷittu       102
   māyavaṉai nōkki vanti malareṭuttu
   māyavaṉaip pōtti maṇampuṇara vēṇumeṉṟu       103
   mārkaḻi nīrāṭi makiḻntu tiruppāvai
   cīrkaḷ kuṟaiyāmal ciṟappākat tāṉpāṭip       104
   pāṭip paṟaikoṇṭu paramaṉukkup pūmālai
   cūṭik koṭuttu toḻutu niṉaittirukka'       105
   māyavaṉum vārāmal mālaikaḷun tārāmal
   āyaṉmukaṅ kāṭṭāmal āru maṉuppāmal       106
   ippaṭikkuc ceytapiḻai yēteṉṟu nāṉaṟiyēṉ
   ceppaṭi tōḻiyarē! tiṅkaḷmukak kaṉṉiyarē,       107
   tōḻiyarum tāṉuraippāḷ 'tuyyavaṭa vēṅkaṭavaṉ
   āḻiyuṭaṉ vantu aḻakāy maṇampuṇarvār'       108
   eṉṟucolak kōtaiyum itaiyuṅ kuḻaintu nitam
   aṉṟil kuyilmēkam araṅkarukkut tūtuviṭat,       109
   'tūtuviṭṭum vārāmal tuyya vēṅkaṭavaṉ
   etiriruntu koṇṭār iṉimēl maṉañcakiyēṉ       111
   eṉṟu maṉamnontu irukka nitaṅ kōtaiyarum
   ceṉṟuvantu tōḻiyarkaḷ ceppavē pāvaiyarkku       111
   'accēti kēṭṭu āḻvār naṭunaṭuṅki
   accutaṉaip pāṭum aḻakāṉa kōtaiyarkkuc       111
   ceṉṟuvantu piḷḷaiviṭāy tīrtta tirumakaṭku
   maṉṟaluñ ceyyāmal vacciruntāl mōcamvarum,       112
   eṉṟu tirumakaḷai eṭuttuc civikaivaiccu
   ceṉṟu tiruvaraṅkam cēvikka vēṇumeṉṟu       114
   nallanāḷ pārttu naṭantu tiruvaraṅkam
   ellaiyuṅ kiṭṭi iruntuteṉ kāviriyil       115
   nīrāṭṭañ ceytu neṭumpōtu cepañceytu
   cīrāṭṭa vantu tirumakaḷat tāṉtēṭap       116
   pallakkil kāṇāmal pantoṭiyār kāṇāmal
   ellāruṅ kāṇāmal eṉmakaḷai yāreṭuttār       117
   niṉṟu maṉamnontu nāṟṟicaiyum tāṉtēṭi
   ceṉṟu tiruvaraṅkat tirukkōyil tāṉpukuntu       118
   orumakaḷai yāṉuṭaiyēṉ ulakaḷanta māyavaṉām
   tirumakaḷait tāṉeṭuttu ceṅkaṇmāl koṇṭoḷittāy!       119
   eṉṟāḻvā ruñcolla iraṅkit tiruvaraṅkar
   ceṉṟeṅkaḷayyar tiruvaṭiyait tāṉtoḻuvār!       120
   appōtu kōtaiyarum araṅkar aṭiyaiviṭṭu
   ippōtum ayyar iṇaiyaṭiyait tāṉtoḻutāḷ!!       121
   vāḻttiyē ayyar makiḻntu makaḷtaṉakkum
   vāḻttiyē muṟṟu makiḻntu reṅkarukkum.       122
   vāḻimutal pāṭi maṅkaḷamum tāṉpāṭi
   'āḻinīr vaṇṇaṉukku aḻakāy maṇampuṇarvāy!       123
   eṉṟu colli yāḻvārum iṉpamāy reṅkartaṉai
   maṉṟalceyya vārumayyā maṇavāḷā eṉṟaḻaittār!       124
   paṅkuṉi mācap pavarṇamaiyil uttirattil
   aṅkūrañ ceytu aḻakāy maṇampuṇara       125
   vārumaiyyā veṉṟu makiḻntētti reṅkaraiyum
   cīraṇinta kōtaitaṉaic ciṟappākat tāṉaḻaikka!!!       126
   appōtu namperumāḷ āḻvārai viṭaikoṭuttut
   tappāmal nāṉvaruvēṉ tārkuḻali taṉṉōṭum.       127
   eṉṟucolli āḻvārum ēkiyē villiputtūr
   ceṉṟutiru māḷikaiyil ciṟappākat tāṉiruntu       128
   kōtaiyarukku maṉṟal kōṣamāyc ceyyaveṉṟu
   .......................................................................
   ..............       129
   cītaiyarkku maṉṟal ciṟappāyc ceyyaveṉṟu,
   ōlai yeḻuti ulakelām nāḷaṉuppik       130
   ..............................................................
   karumpiṉāl kālniṟuttik kaṟpakattāl pantaliṭṭa       131
   karumpiṉiṭai vāḻai kaṭṭik kañcamalar toṅkaviṭṭup
   ................................................................
   132
   pūkkaḷ koṇarntu pūmpantal tāṉpōṭṭu
   .................................................................
   133
   māṅkaṉikaḷ tūkki varukkaip pilātūkkit
   tēṅkaṉikaḷ tūkkic ciṟappā yalaṅkarittu.       134
   mēḷamuṭaṉ mattaḷamum mēlmuracun tāṉaṭikkak
   kāḷamuṭaṉ nākacuram kalantu parimāṟa.       135
   vāṉavarkaḷ malartūvi vantu aṭipaṇiyak
   kāṉavarkaḷ pūkkoytu kalantu paṇintētta.       136
   intiraṉum eṇṭicaiyum iṟaiñci malartūvac
   cantiraṉuñ cūriyaṉum cāmaraṅkaḷ tāṉpōṭa.       137
   ratṉamaṇi yācaṉamum rattiṉak kampaḷiyum
   citramaṇi maṇṭapamum cempoṉ kuṟaṭukaḷum.       138
   āḻvār kiḷaiyum ayalōrkaḷ ellōrum
   āḻvār tirumakaḷai aṉpākap pōṟṟavanta       139
   tūpam kamaḻat toṇṭarkaḷun tāṉpāṭat
   tīpam tulaṅka srīvaiṣṇa vōrirukka       140
   vētan tulaṅka mēṉmēlum cāstiraṅkaḷ
   kītam muḻaṅkak kīrttaṉaṅkaḷ tāṉmuḻaṅka.       141
   vāttimār pulleṭuttu maṟaikaḷ palaōtap.
   ................................................................
   142
   pūraṇa kumpamutal poṟkalacam tāṉumvaittu
   nāraṇaṉaip pōtti nāṉmaṟaikaḷ tāṉōta.       143
   ippaṭikku āḻvārum ellāruṅ kāttirukka
   cat puruṭaṉ vārāmal tāmacamāyt tāṉirukka.       144
   koṟṟap puḷḷiyil reṅkar koṭiya vaṉaṅkaṭantu
   veṟṟic caṅkūti villiputtūr taṉṉilvantu.       145
   maṇavāḷa rākimaṇavaṟaiyil tāṉiruntu
   maṇañceyyum vēḷaikaṇṭu maṟaiyōrkkut tāṉkoṭuttār       146
   āṭaimuta lāparaṇam avaṉimutal pālpacukkaḷ
   kōṭaimutal tāṉaṅ koṭuttu niṟaintapiṉpu       147
   mantaramār kōṭiyuṭuttu maṇamālai
   yantari cūṭṭi aḻakāṉa kōtaiyarkku       148
   mattaḷamkoṭṭa varicaṅkam niṉṟūta
   muttālit tatumpa niraitaraḷap pantaliṉkaṇ       149
   kaittalam pattik kalantu parimāṟa.
   .......................................................       150
   āḻvār tirumakaḷai aḻakākat tāṉvāṅki.       151
   maṉṟaluñ ceytu makiḻntu matuvarkkam
   kaṉṟalu mūṉṟu kaḻittu araṅkaruntāṉ       152
   akkiṉi vaḷarttu aḻakā yalaṅkarittu
   akkiṉiyaip pōtti akṣataiyum tāṉtūvi       153
   vāynallār nalla maṟaiyōti mantirattāl.
   .....................................................................
       154
   pañcilai nāṇaṟ paṭuttup parivaittu
   ...............................................................
   155
   ōmaṅkaḷ ceytu orukkālum malartūvi
   .................................................................
   156
   kāciṉ paṇaṅkaḷ kalantutā ṉeṅ koṭuttu
   ................................................................
   157
   tīvalañ ceytu tirumpi maṉaiyilvantu
   .................................................................
   158
   immaikkum ēḻēḻ piṟavikkum pārttavāy
   nammai yuṭaiyavaṉ nārāyaṇaṉ nampi       159
   cemmaiyuṭaiya tirukkaiyāl tāḻtti
   ammi mitittu aruntatiyum tāṉpārttu       160
   arimutaṉ accutaṉ aṅkaimēlum kaivaittup
   pori mukantapaṭip pōtti maṟaiyōrai       161
   akṣataikaḷ vāṅki araṅkar maṇavaraiyil
   pakṣamuṭa ṉiruntu pākkilaiyun tāṉpōṭṭuk       162
   kōtaiyuṭaṉ kūṭik kuṅkumac capparattil
   cītaiyuṭaṉ kūṭic ciṟappākat tāṉiruntār.       163
   accēti kēṭṭu āḻvār maṉamakiḻntu
   iccēti vaipavaṅkaḷ eṅkuṅ kiṭaiyātu.       164
   eṉṟu periyāḻvār iḷaki maṉamakiḻntu
   kuṉṟu kuṭaiyeṭutta kōṉai makiḻntunitam.       165
   vāḻi mutal pāṭi maṅkaḷamum tāṉpāṭa
   āḻimutal pāṭi āḻvārum pōṟṟiniṉṟār       166
   vāḻum putuvainakar māmaṟaiyōr tāṉvāḻi
   āḻiniṟai vaṇṇaṉmutal āḻvārkaḷ tāṉvāḻi       167
   kōtaiyarum vāḻikōyilkaḷum tāṉvāḻi
   cītaiyarumvāḻi cekamuḻutum tāṉvāḻi.       168
   ---------
   kōtai nācciyār tālāṭṭu muṟṟiṟṟu.
     __________________________________________________________________

   This file was last updated on 4 April 2023.
   Feel free to send the corrections to the webmaster (pmadurai AT
   gmail.com)

References

   1. https://www.projectmadurai.org/pm_etexts/utf8/pmuni0112.html
